The other day I saw a wedding . . . but no, I had better tell you about the Christmas
tree. The wedding was nice, I liked it very much; but the other incident was better.
I don’t know how it was that, looking at that wedding, I thought of that Christmas
tree. This was what happened. Just five years ago, on New Year’s Eve, I was invited to a
children’s party. The giver of the party was a well-known and business-like personage,
with connections, with a large circle of acquaintances, and a good many schemes on hand,
so that it may be supposed that this party was an excuse for getting the parents together
and discussing various interesting matters in an innocent, casual way. I was an outsider; I
had no interesting matter to contribute, and so I spent the evening rather independently.
There was another gentleman present who was, I fancied, of no special rank or family,
and who, like me, had simply turned up at this family festivity. He was the first to catch
my eye. He was a tall, lanky man, very grave and very correctly dressed. But one could see
that he was in no mood for merrymaking and family festivity; whenever he withdrew into
a corner he left off smiling and knitted his bushy black brows. He had not a single
acquaintance in the party except his host. One could see that he was fearfully bored, but
that he was valiantly keeping up the part of a man perfectly happy and enjoying himself. I
learned afterwards that this was a gentleman from the provinces, who had a critical and
perplexing piece of business in Petersburg, who had brought a letter of introduction to
our host, for whom our host was, by no means con amore, using his interest, and whom
he had invited, out of civility, to his children’s party. He did not play cards, cigars were not
offered him, every one avoided entering into conversation with him, most likely
recognizing the bird from its feathers; and so my gentleman was forced to sit the whole
evening stroking his whiskers simply to have something to do with his hands. His
whiskers were certainly very fine. But he stroked them so zealously that, looking at him,
one might have supposed that the whiskers were created first and the gentleman only
attached to them in order to stroke them.
In addition to this individual who assisted in this way at our host’s family festivity
(he had five fat, well-fed boys), I was attracted, too, by another gentleman. But he was
quite of a different sort. He was a personage. He was called Yulian Mastakovitch. From
the first glance one could see that he was an honoured guest, and stood in the same
relation to our host as our host stood in relation to the gentleman who was stroking his

whiskers. Our host and hostess said no end of polite things to him, waited on him hand
and foot, pressed him to drink, flattered him, brought their visitors up to be introduced to
him, but did not take him to be introduced to any one else. I noticed that tears glistened
in our host’s eyes when he remarked about the party that he had rarely spent an evening
so agreeably. I felt as it were frightened in the presence of such a personage, and so, after
admiring the children, I went away into a little parlour, which was quite empty, and sat
down in an arbour of flowers which filled up almost half the room.
The children were all incredibly sweet, and resolutely refused to model themselves
on the “grown-ups,” regardless of all the admonitions of their governesses and mammas.
They stripped the Christmas tree to the last sweetmeat in the twinkling of an eye, and had
succeeded in breaking half the playthings before they knew what was destined for which.
Particularly charming was a black-eyed, curly-headed boy, who kept trying to shoot me
with his wooden gun. But my attention was still more attracted by his sister, a girl of
eleven, quiet, dreamy, pale, with big, prominent, dreamy eyes, exquisite as a little Cupid.
The children hurt her feelings in some way, and so she came away from them to the same
empty parlour in which I was sitting, and played with her doll in the corner. The visitors
respectfully pointed out her father, a wealthy contractor, and some one whispered that
three hundred thousand roubles were already set aside for her dowry. I turned round to
glance at the group who were interested in such a circumstance, and my eye fell on Yulian
Mastakovitch, who, with his hands behind his back and his head on one side, was
listening with the greatest attention to these gentlemen’s idle gossip. Afterwards I could
not help admiring the discrimination of the host and hostess in the distribution of the
children’s presents. The little girl, who had already a portion of three hundred thousand
roubles, received the costliest doll. Then followed presents diminishing in value in
accordance with the rank of the parents of these happy children; finally, the child of
lowest degree, a thin, freckled, red-haired little boy of ten, got nothing but a book of
stories about the marvels of nature and tears of devotion, etc., without pictures or even
woodcuts. He was the son of a poor widow, the governess of the children of the house, an
oppressed and scared little boy. He was dressed in a short jacket of inferior nankin. After
receiving his book he walked round the other toys for a long time; he longed to play with
the other children, but did not dare; it was evident that he already felt and understood his
position. I love watching children. Their first independent approaches to life are
extremely interesting. I noticed that the red-haired boy was so fascinated by the costly
toys of the other children, especially by a theatre in which he certainly longed to take

some part, that he made up his mind to sacrifice his dignity. He smiled and began playing
with the other children, he gave away his apple to a fat-faced little boy who had a mass of
goodies tied up in a pocket-handkerchief already, and even brought himself to carry
another boy on his back, simply not to be turned away from the theatre, but an insolent
youth gave him a heavy thump a minute later. The child did not dare to cry. Then the
governess, his mother, made her appearance, and told him not to interfere with the other
children’s playing. The boy went away to the same room in which was the little girl. She
let him join her, and the two set to work very eagerly dressing the expensive doll.
I had been sitting more than half an hour in the ivy arbour, listening to the little
prattle of the red-haired boy and the beauty with the dowry of three hundred thousand,
who was nursing her doll, when Yulian Mastakovitch suddenly walked into the room. He
had taken advantage of the general commotion following a quarrel among the children to
step out of the drawing-room. I had noticed him a moment before talking very cordially to
the future heiress’s papa, whose acquaintance he had just made, of the superiority of one
branch of the service over another. Now he stood in hesitation and seemed to be
reckoning something on his fingers.
“Three hundred . . . three hundred,” he was whispering. “Eleven . . . twelve . . .
thirteen,” and so on. “Sixteen — five years! Supposing it is at four per cent. — five times
twelve is sixty; yes, to that sixty . . . well, in five years we may assume it will be four
hundred. Yes! . . . But he won’t stick to four per cent., the rascal. He can get eight or ten.
Well, five hundred, let us say, five hundred at least . . . that’s certain; well, say a little
more for frills. H’m! . . . ”
His hesitation was at an end, he blew his nose and was on the point of going out of
the room when he suddenly glanced at the little girl and stopped short. He did not see me
behind the pots of greenery. It seemed to me that he was greatly excited. Either his
calculations had affected his imagination or something else, for he rubbed his hands and
could hardly stand still. This excitement reached its utmost limit when he stopped and
bent another resolute glance at the future heiress. He was about to move forward, but
first looked round, then moving on tiptoe, as though he felt guilty, he advanced towards
the children. He approached with a little smile, bent down and kissed her on the head.
The child, not expecting this attack, uttered a cry of alarm.
“What are you doing here, sweet child?” he asked in a whisper, looking round and
patting the girl’s cheek.
“We are playing.”

“Ah! With him?” Yulian Mastakovitch looked askance at the boy. “You had better go
into the drawing-room, my dear,” he said to him.
The boy looked at him open-eyed and did not utter a word. Yulian Mastakovitch
looked round him again, and again bent down to the little girl.
“And what is this you’ve got — a dolly, dear child?” he asked.
“Yes, a dolly,” answered the child, frowning, and a little shy.
“A dolly . . . and do you know, dear child, what your dolly is made of?”
“I don’t know . . . ” the child answered in a whisper, hanging her head.
“It’s made of rags, darling. You had better go into the drawing-room to your
playmates, boy,” said Yulian Mastakovitch, looking sternly at the boy. The boy and girl
frowned and clutched at each other. They did not want to be separated.
“And do you know why they gave you that doll?” asked Yulian Mastakovitch,
dropping his voice to a softer and softer tone.
“I don’t know.”
“Because you have been a sweet and well-behaved child all the week.”
At this point Yulian Mastakovitch, more excited than ever, speaking in most dulcet
tones, asked at last, in a hardly audible voice choked with emotion and impatience —
“And will you love me, dear little girl, when I come and see your papa and mamma?”
Saying this, Yulian Mastakovitch tried once more to kiss “the dear little girl,” but the
red-haired boy, seeing that the little girl was on the point of tears, clutched her hand and
began whimpering from sympathy for her. Yulian Mastakovitch was angry in earnest.
“Go away, go away from here, go away!” he said to the boy. “Go into the drawingroom! Go in there to your playmates!”
“No, he needn’t, he needn’t! You go away,” said the little girl. “Leave him alone, leave
him alone,” she said, almost crying.
Some one made a sound at the door. Yulian Mastakovitch instantly raised his
majestic person and took alarm. But the red-haired boy was even more alarmed than
Yulian Mastakovitch; he abandoned the little girl and, slinking along by the wall, stole out
of the parlour into the dining-room. To avoid arousing suspicion, Yulian Mastakovitch,
too, went into the dining-room. He was as red as a lobster, and, glancing into the lookingglass, seemed to be ashamed at himself. He was perhaps vexed with himself for his
impetuosity and hastiness. Possibly, he was at first so much impressed by his

calculations, so inspired and fascinated by them, that in spite of his seriousness and
dignity he made up his mind to behave like a boy, and directly approach the object of his
attentions, even though she could not be really the object of his attentions for another
five years at least. I followed the estimable gentleman into the dining-room and there
beheld a strange spectacle. Yulian Mastakovitch, flushed with vexation and anger, was
frightening the red-haired boy, who, retreating from him, did not know where to run in
his terror.
“Go away; what are you doing here? Go away, you scamp; are you after the fruit here,
eh? Get along, you naughty boy! Get along, you sniveller, to your playmates!”
The panic-stricken boy in his desperation tried creeping under the table. Then his
persecutor, in a fury, took out his large batiste handkerchief and began flicking it under
the table at the child, who kept perfectly quiet. It must be observed that Yulian
Mastakovitch was a little inclined to be fat. He was a sleek, red-faced, solidly built man,
paunchy, with thick legs; what is called a fine figure of a man, round as a nut. He was
perspiring, breathless, and fearfully flushed. At last he was almost rigid, so great was his
indignation and perhaps — who knows? — his jealousy. I burst into loud laughter. Yulian
Mastakovitch turned round and, in spite of all his consequence, was overcome with
confusion. At that moment from the opposite door our host came in. The boy crept out
from under the table and wiped his elbows and his knees. Yulian Mastakovitch hastened
to put to his nose the handkerchief which he was holding in his hand by one end.
Our host looked at the three of us in some perplexity; but as a man who knew
something of life, and looked at it from a serious point of view, he at once availed himself
of the chance of catching his visitor by himself.
“Here, this is the boy,” he said, pointing to the red-haired boy, “for whom I had the
honour to solicit your influence.”
“Ah!” said Yulian Mastakovitch, who had hardly quite recovered himself.
“The son of my children’s governess,” said our host, in a tone of a petitioner, “a poor
woman, the widow of an honest civil servant; and therefore . . . and therefore, Yulian
Mastakovitch, if it were possible . . . ”
“Oh, no, no!” Yulian Mastakovitch made haste to answer; “no, excuse me, Filip
Alexyevitch, it’s quite impossible. I’ve made inquiries; there’s no vacancy, and if there
were, there are twenty applicants who have far more claim than he. . . . I am very sorry,
very sorry. . . . ”

“What a pity,” said our host. “He is a quiet, well-behaved boy.”
“A great rascal, as I notice,” answered Yulian Mastakovitch, with a nervous twist of
his lip. “Get along, boy; why are you standing there? Go to your playmates,” he said,
addressing the child.
At that point he could not contain himself, and glanced at me out of one eye. I, too,
could not contain myself, and laughed straight in his face. Yulian Mastakovitch turned
away at once, and in a voice calculated to reach my ear, asked who was that strange young
man? They whispered together and walked out of the room. I saw Yulian Mastakovitch
afterwards shaking his head incredulously as our host talked to him.
After laughing to my heart’s content I returned to the drawing-room. There the great
man, surrounded by fathers and mothers of families, including the host and hostess, was
saying something very warmly to a lady to whom he had just been introduced. The lady
was holding by the hand the little girl with whom Yulian Mastakovitch had had the scene
in the parlour a little while before. Now he was launching into praises and raptures over
the beauty, the talents, the grace and the charming manners of the charming child. He
was unmistakably making up to the mamma. The mother listened to him almost with
tears of delight. The father’s lips were smiling. Our host was delighted at the general
satisfaction. All the guests, in fact, were sympathetically gratified; even the children’s
games were checked that they might not hinder the conversation: the whole atmosphere
was saturated with reverence. I heard afterwards the mamma of the interesting child,
deeply touched, beg Yulian Mastakovitch, in carefully chosen phrases, to do her the
special honour of bestowing upon them the precious gift of his acquaintance, and heard
with what unaffected delight Yulian Mastakovitch accepted the invitation, and how
afterwards the guests, dispersing in different directions, moving away with the greatest
propriety, poured out to one another the most touchingly flattering comments upon the
contractor, his wife, his little girl, and, above all, upon Yulian Mastakovitch.
“Is that gentleman married?” I asked, almost aloud, of one of my acquaintances, who
was standing nearest to Yulian Mastakovitch. Yulian Mastakovitch flung a searching and
vindictive glance at me.
“No!” answered my acquaintance, chagrined to the bottom of his heart by the
awkwardness of which I had intentionally been guilty. . . .
I passed lately by a certain church; I was struck by the crowd of people in carriages. I
heard people talking of the wedding. It was a cloudy day, it was beginning to sleet. I made
my way through the crowd at the door and saw the bridegroom. He was a sleek, well-fed,

round, paunchy man, very gorgeously dressed up. He was running fussily about, giving
orders. At last the news passed through the crowd that the bride was coming. I squeezed
my way through the crowd and saw a marvellous beauty, who could scarcely have reached
her first season. But the beauty was pale and melancholy. She looked preoccupied; I even
fancied that her eyes were red with recent weeping. The classic severity of every feature of
her face gave a certain dignity and seriousness to her beauty. But through that sternness
and dignity, through that melancholy, could be seen the look of childish innocence;
something indescribably naïve, fluid, youthful, which seemed mutely begging for mercy.
People were saying that she was only just sixteen. Glancing attentively at the
bridegroom, I suddenly recognized him as Yulian Mastakovitch, whom I had not seen for
five years. I looked at her. My God! I began to squeeze my way as quickly as I could out of
the church. I heard people saying in the crowd that the bride was an heiress, that she had
a dowry of five hundred thousand . . . and a trousseau worth ever so much.
“It was a good stroke of business, though!” I thought as I made my way into the
street.
