An Honest Thief by Fyodor Dostovesky
One morning, just as I was about to set off to my office, Agrafena, my cook, washerwoman and
housekeeper, came in to me and, to my surprise, entered into conversation.
She had always been such a silent, simple creature that, except her daily inquiry about dinner, she had not
uttered a word for the last six years. I, at least, had heard nothing else from her.
"Here I have come in to have a word with you, sir," she began abruptly; "you really ought to let the little
room."
"Which little room?"
"Why, the one next the kitchen, to be sure."
"What for?"
"What for? Why because folks do take in lodgers, to be sure."
"But who would take it?"
"Who would take it? Why, a lodger would take it, to be sure."
"But, my good woman, one could not put a bedstead in it; there wouldn't be room to move! Who could live
in it?"
"Who wants to live there! As long as he has a place to sleep in. Why, he would live in the window."
"In what window?"
"In what window! As though you didn't know! The one in the passage, to be sure. He would sit there,
sewing or doing anything else. Maybe he would sit on a chair, too. He's got a chair; and he has a table, too;
he's got everything."
"Who is 'he' then?"
"Oh, a good man, a man of experience. I will cook for him. And I'll ask him three roubles a month for his
board and lodging."
After prolonged efforts I succeeded at last in learning from Agrafena that an elderly man had somehow
managed to persuade her to admit him into the kitchen as a lodger and boarder. Any notion Agrafena took
into her head had to be carried out; if not, I knew she would give me no peace. When anything was not to
her liking, she at once began to brood, and sank into a deep dejection that would last for a fortnight or three
weeks. During that period my dinners were spoiled, my linen was mislaid, my floors went unscrubbed; in

short, I had a great deal to put up with. I had observed long ago that this inarticulate woman was incapable
of conceiving a project, of originating an idea of her own. But if anything like a notion or a project was by
some means put into her feeble brain, to prevent its being carried out meant, for a time, her moral
assassination. And so, as I cared more for my peace of mind than for anything else, I consented forthwith.
"Has he a passport anyway, or something of the sort?"
"To be sure, he has. He is a good man, a man of experience; three roubles he's promised to pay."
The very next day the new lodger made his appearance in my modest bachelor quarters; but I was not put
out by this, indeed I was inwardly pleased. I lead as a rule a very lonely hermit's existence. I have scarcely any
friends; I hardly ever go anywhere. As I had spent ten years never coming out of my shell, I had, of course,
grown used to solitude. But another ten or fifteen years or more of the same solitary existence, with the same
Agrafena, in the same bachelor quarters, was in truth a somewhat cheerless prospect. And therefore a new
inmate, if well-behaved, was a heaven-sent blessing.
Agrafena had spoken truly: my lodger was certainly a man of experience. From his passport it appeared that
he was an old soldier, a fact which I should have known indeed from his face. An old soldier is easily
recognised. Astafy Ivanovitch was a favourable specimen of his class. We got on very well together. What
was best of all, Astafy Ivanovitch would sometimes tell a story, describing some incident in his own life. In
the perpetual boredom of my existence such a story-teller was a veritable treasure. One day he told me one of
these stories. It made an impression on me. The following event was what led to it.
I was left alone in the flat; both Astafy and Agrafena were out on business of their own. All of a sudden I
heard from the inner room somebody—I fancied a stranger—come in; I went out; there actually was a
stranger in the passage, a short fellow wearing no overcoat in spite of the cold autumn weather.
"What do you want?"
"Does a clerk called Alexandrov live here?"
"Nobody of that name here, brother. Good-bye."
"Why, the dvornik told me it was here," said my visitor, cautiously retiring towards the door.
"Be off, be off, brother, get along."
Next day after dinner, while Astafy Ivanovitch was fitting on a coat which he was altering for me, again
some one came into the passage. I half opened the door.
Before my very eyes my yesterday's visitor, with perfect composure, took my wadded greatcoat from the peg
and, stuffing it under his arm, darted out of the flat. Agrafena stood all the time staring at him, agape with
astonishment and doing nothing for the protection of my property. Astafy Ivanovitch flew in pursuit of the
thief and ten minutes later came back out of breath and empty-handed. He had vanished completely.
"Well, there's a piece of luck, Astafy Ivanovitch!"

"It's a good job your cloak is left! Or he would have put you in a plight, the thief!"
But the whole incident had so impressed Astafy Ivanovitch that I forgot the theft as I looked at him. He
could not get over it. Every minute or two he would drop the work upon which he was engaged, and would
describe over again how it had all happened, how he had been standing, how the greatcoat had been taken
down before his very eyes, not a yard away, and how it had come to pass that he could not catch the thief.
Then he would sit down to his work again, then leave it once more, and at last I saw him go down to the
dvornik to tell him all about it, and to upbraid him for letting such a thing happen in his domain. Then he
came back and began scolding Agrafena. Then he sat down to his work again, and long afterwards he was
still muttering to himself how it had all happened, how he stood there and I was here, how before our eyes,
not a yard away, the thief took the coat off the peg, and so on. In short, though Astafy Ivanovitch
understood his business, he was a terrible slow-coach and busy-body.
"He's made fools of us, Astafy Ivanovitch," I said to him in the evening, as I gave him a glass of tea. I wanted
to while away the time by recalling the story of the lost greatcoat, the frequent repetition of which, together
with the great earnestness of the speaker, was beginning to become very amusing.
"Fools, indeed, sir! Even though it is no business of mine, I am put out. It makes me angry though it is not
my coat that was lost. To my thinking there is no vermin in the world worse than a thief. Another takes
what you can spare, but a thief steals the work of your hands, the sweat of your brow, your time ... Ugh, it's
nasty! One can't speak of it! it's too vexing. How is it you don't feel the loss of your property, sir?"
"Yes, you are right, Astafy Ivanovitch, better if the thing had been burnt; it's annoying to let the thief have
it, it's disagreeable."
"Disagreeable! I should think so! Yet, to be sure, there are thieves and thieves. And I have happened, sir, to
come across an honest thief."
"An honest thief? But how can a thief be honest, Astafy Ivanovitch?"
"There you are right indeed, sir. How can a thief be honest? There are none such. I only meant to say that
he was an honest man, sure enough, and yet he stole. I was simply sorry for him."
"Why, how was that, Astafy Ivanovitch?"
"It was about two years ago, sir. I had been nearly a year out of a place, and just before I lost my place I
made the acquaintance of a poor lost creature. We got acquainted in a public-house. He was a drunkard, a
vagrant, a beggar, he had been in a situation of some sort, but from his drinking habits he had lost his work.
Such a ne'er-do-weel! God only knows what he had on! Often you wouldn't be sure if he'd a shirt under his
coat; everything he could lay his hands upon he would drink away. But he was not one to quarrel; he was a
quiet fellow. A soft, good-natured chap. And he'd never ask, he was ashamed; but you could see for yourself
the poor fellow wanted a drink, and you would stand it him. And so we got friendly, that's to say, he stuck
to me.... It was all one to me. And what a man he was, to be sure! Like a little dog he would follow me;
wherever I went there he would be; and all that after our first meeting, and he as thin as a thread-paper! At
first it was 'let me stay the night'; well, I let him stay.
"I looked at his passport, too; the man was all right.

"Well, the next day it was the same story, and then the third day he came again and sat all day in the
window and stayed the night. Well, thinks I, he is sticking to me; give him food and drink and shelter at
night, too—here am I, a poor man, and a hanger-on to keep as well! And before he came to me, he used to
go in the same way to a government clerk's; he attached himself to him; they were always drinking together;
but he, through trouble of some sort, drank himself into the grave. My man was called Emelyan Ilyitch. I
pondered and pondered what I was to do with him. To drive him away I was ashamed. I was sorry for him;
such a pitiful, God-forsaken creature I never did set eyes on. And not a word said either; he does not ask, but
just sits there and looks into your eyes like a dog. To think what drinking will bring a man down to!
"I keep asking myself how am I to say to him: 'You must be moving, Emelyanoushka, there's nothing for
you here, you've come to the wrong place; I shall soon not have a bite for myself, how am I to keep you
too?'
"I sat and wondered what he'd do when I said that to him. And I seemed to see how he'd stare at me, if he
were to hear me say that, how long he would sit and not understand a word of it. And when it did get home
to him at last, how he would get up from the window, would take up his bundle—I can see it now, the redcheck handkerchief full of holes, with God knows what wrapped up in it, which he had always with him,
and then how he would set his shabby old coat to rights, so that it would look decent and keep him warm,
so that no holes would be seen—he was a man of delicate feelings! And how he'd open the door and go out
with tears in his eyes. Well, there's no letting a man go to ruin like that.... One's sorry for him.
"And then again, I think, how am I off myself? Wait a bit, Emelyanoushka, says I to myself, you've not long
to feast with me: I shall soon be going away and then you will not find me.
"Well, sir, our family made a move; and Alexandr Filimonovitch, my master (now deceased, God rest his
soul), said, 'I am thoroughly satisfied with you, Astafy Ivanovitch; when we come back from the country we
will take you on again.' I had been butler with them; a nice gentleman he was, but he died that same year.
Well, after seeing him off, I took my belongings, what little money I had, and I thought I'd have a rest for a
time, so I went to an old woman I knew, and I took a corner in her room. There was only one corner free in
it. She had been a nurse, so now she had a pension and a room of her own. Well, now good-bye,
Emelyanoushka, thinks I, you won't find me now, my boy.
"And what do you think, sir? I had gone out to see a man I knew, and when I came back in the evening, the
first thing I saw was Emelyanoushka! There he was, sitting on my box and his check bundle beside him; he
was sitting in his ragged old coat, waiting for me. And to while away the time he had borrowed a church
book from the old lady, and was holding it wrong side upwards. He'd scented me out! My heart sank. Well,
thinks I, there's no help for it—why didn't I turn him out at first? So I asked him straight off: Have you
brought your passport, Emelyanoushka?'
"I sat down on the spot, sir, and began to ponder: will a vagabond like that be very much trouble to me?
And on thinking it over it seemed he would not be much trouble. He must be fed, I thought. Well, a bit of
bread in the morning, and to make it go down better I'll buy him an onion. At midday I should have to give
him another bit of bread and an onion; and in the evening, onion again with kvass, with some more bread if
he wanted it. And if some cabbage soup were to come our way, then we should both have had our fill. I am
no great eater myself, and a drinking man, as we all know, never eats; all he wants is herb-brandy or green
vodka. He'll ruin me with his drinking, I thought, but then another idea came into my head, sir, and took
great hold on me. So much so that if Emelyanoushka had gone away I should have felt that I had nothing to

live for, I do believe.... I determined on the spot to be a father and guardian to him. I'll keep him from ruin,
I thought, I'll wean him from the glass! You wait a bit, thought I; very well, Emelyanoushka, you may stay,
only you must behave yourself; you must obey orders.
"Well, thinks I to myself, I'll begin by training him to work of some sort, but not all at once; let him enjoy
himself a little first, and I'll look round and find something you are fit for, Emelyanoushka. For every sort of
work a man needs a special ability, you know, sir. And I began to watch him on the quiet; I soon saw
Emelyanoushka was a desperate character. I began, sir, with a word of advice: I said this and that to him.
'Emelyanoushka,' said I, 'you ought to take a thought and mend your ways. Have done with drinking! Just
look what rags you go about in: that old coat of yours, if I may make bold to say so, is fit for nothing but a
sieve. A pretty state of things! It's time to draw the line, sure enough.' Emelyanoushka sat and listened to me
with his head hanging down. Would you believe it, sir? It had come to such a pass with him, he'd lost his
tongue through drink and could not speak a word of sense. Talk to him of cucumbers and he'd answer back
about beans! He would listen and listen to me and then heave such a sigh. 'What are you sighing for,
Emelyan Ilyitch?' I asked him.
"'Oh, nothing; don't you mind me, Astafy Ivanovitch. Do you know there were two women fighting in the
street to-day, Astafy Ivanovitch? One upset the other woman's basket of cranberries by accident.'
"'Well, what of that?'
"'And the second one upset the other's cranberries on purpose and trampled them under foot, too.'
"'Well, and what of it, Emelyan Ilyitch?'
"'Why, nothing, Astafy Ivanovitch, I just mentioned it.'
"'"Nothing, I just mentioned it!" Emelyanoushka, my boy, I thought, you've squandered and drunk away
your brains!'
"'And do you know, a gentleman dropped a money-note on the pavement in Gorohovy Street, no, it was
Sadovy Street. And a peasant saw it and said, "That's my luck"; and at the same time another man saw it
and said, "No, it's my bit of luck. I saw it before you did."'
"'Well, Emelyan Ilyitch?'
"'And the fellows had a fight over it, Astafy Ivanovitch. But a policeman came up, took away the note, gave
it back to the gentleman and threatened to take up both the men.'
"'Well, but what of that? What is there edifying about it, Emelyanoushka?'
"'Why, nothing, to be sure. Folks laughed, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'Ach, Emelyanoushka! What do the folks matter? You've sold your soul for a brass farthing! But do you
know what I have to tell you, Emelyan Ilyitch?'
"'What, Astafy Ivanovitch?'

"'Take a job of some sort, that's what you must do. For the hundredth time I say to you, set to work, have
some mercy on yourself!'
"'What could I set to, Astafy Ivanovitch? I don't know what job I could set to, and there is no one who will
take me on, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'That's how you came to be turned off, Emelyanoushka, you drinking man!'
"'And do you know Vlass, the waiter, was sent for to the office to-day, Astafy Ivanovitch?'
"'Why did they send for him, Emelyanoushka?' I asked.
"'I could not say why, Astafy Ivanovitch. I suppose they wanted him there, and that's why they sent for
him.'
"A-ach, thought I, we are in a bad way, poor Emelyanoushka! The Lord is chastising us for our sins. Well,
sir, what is one to do with such a man?
"But a cunning fellow he was, and no mistake. He'd listen and listen to me, but at last I suppose he got sick
of it. As soon as he sees I am beginning to get angry, he'd pick up his old coat and out he'd slip and leave no
trace. He'd wander about all day and come back at night drunk. Where he got the money from, the Lord
only knows; I had no hand in that.
"'No,' said I, 'Emelyan Ilyitch, you'll come to a bad end. Give over drinking, mind what I say now, give it
up! Next time you come home in liquor, you can spend the night on the stairs. I won't let you in!'
"After hearing that threat, Emelyanoushka sat at home that day and the next; but on the third he slipped off
again. I waited and waited; he didn't come back. Well, at least I don't mind owning, I was in a fright, and I
felt for the man too. What have I done to him? I thought. I've scared him away. Where's the poor fellow
gone to now? He'll get lost maybe. Lord have mercy upon us!
"Night came on, he did not come. In the morning I went out into the porch; I looked, and if he hadn't gone
to sleep in the porch! There he was with his head on the step, and chilled to the marrow of his bones.
"'What next, Emelyanoushka, God have mercy on you! Where will you get to next!'
"'Why, you were—sort of—angry with me, Astafy Ivanovitch, the other day, you were vexed and promised
to put me to sleep in the porch, so I didn't—sort of—venture to come in, Astafy Ivanovitch, and so I lay
down here....'
"I did feel angry and sorry too.
"'Surely you might undertake some other duty, Emelyanoushka, instead of lying here guarding the steps,' I
said.
"'Why, what other duty, Astafy Ivanovitch?'

"'You lost soul'—I was in such a rage, I called him that—'if you could but learn tailoring work! Look at
your old rag of a coat! It's not enough to have it in tatters, here you are sweeping the steps with it! You
might take a needle and boggle up your rags, as decency demands. Ah, you drunken man!'
"What do you think, sir? He actually did take a needle. Of course I said it in jest, but he was so scared he set
to work. He took off his coat and began threading the needle. I watched him; as you may well guess, his eyes
were all red and bleary, and his hands were all of a shake. He kept shoving and shoving the thread and could
not get it through the eye of the needle; he kept screwing his eyes up and wetting the thread and twisting it
in his fingers—it was no good! He gave it up and looked at me.
"'Well,' said I, 'this is a nice way to treat me! If there had been folks by to see, I don't know what I should
have done! Why, you simple fellow, I said it you in joke, as a reproach. Give over your nonsense, God bless
you! Sit quiet and don't put me to shame, don't sleep on my stairs and make a laughing-stock of me.'
"'Why, what am I to do, Astafy Ivanovitch? I know very well I am a drunkard and good for nothing! I can
do nothing but vex you, my bene—bene—factor....'
"And at that his blue lips began all of a sudden to quiver, and a tear ran down his white cheek and trembled
on his stubbly chin, and then poor Emelyanoushka burst into a regular flood of tears. Mercy on us! I felt as
though a knife were thrust into my heart! The sensitive creature! I'd never have expected it. Who could have
guessed it? No, Emelyanoushka, thought I, I shall give you up altogether. You can go your way like the
rubbish you are.
"Well, sir, why make a long story of it? And the whole affair is so trifling; it's not worth wasting words upon.
Why, you, for instance, sir, would not have given a thought to it, but I would have given a great deal—if I
had a great deal to give—that it never should have happened at all.
"I had a pair of riding breeches by me, sir, deuce take them, fine, first-rate riding breeches they were too,
blue with a check on it. They'd been ordered by a gentleman from the country, but he would not have them
after all; said they were not full enough, so they were left on my hands. It struck me they were worth
something. At the second-hand dealer's I ought to get five silver roubles for them, or if not I could turn
them into two pairs of trousers for Petersburg gentlemen and have a piece over for a waistcoat for myself. Of
course for poor people like us everything comes in. And it happened just then that Emelyanoushka was
having a sad time of it. There he sat day after day: he did not drink, not a drop passed his lips, but he sat and
moped like an owl. It was sad to see him—he just sat and brooded. Well, thought I, either you've not got a
copper to spend, my lad, or else you're turning over a new leaf of yourself, you've given it up, you've listened
to reason. Well, sir, that's how it was with us; and just then came a holiday. I went to vespers; when I came
home I found Emelyanoushka sitting in the window, drunk and rocking to and fro.
"Ah! so that's what you've been up to, my lad! And I went to get something out of my chest. And when I
looked in, the breeches were not there.... I rummaged here and there; they'd vanished. When I'd ransacked
everywhere and saw they were not there, something seemed to stab me to the heart. I ran first to the old
dame and began accusing her; of Emelyanoushka I'd not the faintest suspicion, though there was cause for it
in his sitting there drunk.

"'No,' said the old body, 'God be with you, my fine gentleman, what good are riding breeches to me? Am I
going to wear such things? Why, a skirt I had I lost the other day through a fellow of your sort ... I know
nothing; I can tell you nothing about it,' she said.
"'Who has been here, who has been in?' I asked.
"'Why, nobody has been, my good sir,' says she; 'I've been here all the while; Emelyan Ilyitch went out and
came back again; there he sits, ask him.'
"'Emelyanoushka,' said I, 'have you taken those new riding breeches for anything; you remember the pair I
made for that gentleman from the country?'
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he; 'I've not—sort of—touched them.'
"I was in a state! I hunted high and low for them—they were nowhere to be found. And Emelyanoushka sits
there rocking himself to and fro. I was squatting on my heels facing him and bending over the chest, and all
at once I stole a glance at him.... Alack, I thought; my heart suddenly grew hot within me and I felt myself
flushing up too. And suddenly Emelyanoushka looked at me.
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he, 'those riding breeches of yours, maybe, you are thinking, maybe, I took
them, but I never touched them.'
"'But what can have become of them, Emelyan Ilyitch?'
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he, 'I've never seen them.'
"'Why, Emelyan Ilyitch, I suppose they've run off of themselves, eh?'
"'Maybe they have, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"When I heard him say that, I got up at once, went up to him, lighted the lamp and sat down to work to my
sewing. I was altering a waistcoat for a clerk who lived below us. And wasn't there a burning pain and ache
in my breast! I shouldn't have minded so much if I had put all the clothes I had in the fire. Emelyanoushka
seemed to have an inkling of what a rage I was in. When a man is guilty, you know, sir, he scents trouble far
off, like the birds of the air before a storm.
"'Do you know what, Astafy Ivanovitch,' Emelyanoushka began, and his poor old voice was shaking as he
said the words, 'Antip Prohoritch, the apothecary, married the coachman's wife this morning, who died the
other day——'
"I did give him a look, sir, a nasty look it was; Emelyanoushka understood it too. I saw him get up, go to the
bed, and begin to rummage there for something. I waited—he was busy there a long time and kept
muttering all the while, 'No, not there, where can the blessed things have got to!' I waited to see what he'd
do; I saw him creep under the bed on all fours. I couldn't bear it any longer. 'What are you crawling about
under the bed for, Emelyan Ilyitch?' said I.
"'Looking for the breeches, Astafy Ivanovitch. Maybe they've dropped down there somewhere.'

"'Why should you try to help a poor simple man like me,' said I, 'crawling on your knees for nothing, sir?'—
I called him that in my vexation.
"'Oh, never mind, Astafy Ivanovitch, I'll just look. They'll turn up, maybe, somewhere.'
"'H'm,' said I, 'look here, Emelyan Ilyitch!'
"'What is it, Astafy Ivanovitch?' said he.
"'Haven't you simply stolen them from me like a thief and a robber, in return for the bread and salt you've
eaten here?' said I.
"I felt so angry, sir, at seeing him fooling about on his knees before me.
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"And he stayed lying as he was on his face under the bed. A long time he lay there and then at last crept out.
I looked at him and the man was as white as a sheet. He stood up, and sat down near me in the window and
sat so for some ten minutes.
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' he said, and all at once he stood up and came towards me, and I can see him now;
he looked dreadful. 'No, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he, 'I never—sort of—touched your breeches.'
"He was all of a shake, poking himself in the chest with a trembling finger, and his poor old voice shook so
that I was frightened, sir, and sat as though I was rooted to the window-seat.
"'Well, Emelyan Ilyitch,' said I, 'as you will, forgive me if I, in my foolishness, have accused you unjustly. As
for the breeches, let them go hang; we can live without them. We've still our hands, thank God; we need not
go thieving or begging from some other poor man; we'll earn our bread.'
"Emelyanoushka heard me out and went on standing there before me. I looked up, and he had sat down.
And there he sat all the evening without stirring. At last I lay down to sleep. Emelyanoushka went on sitting
in the same place. When I looked out in the morning, he was lying curled up in his old coat on the bare
floor; he felt too crushed even to come to bed. Well, sir, I felt no more liking for the fellow from that day, in
fact for the first few days I hated him. I felt as one may say as though my own son had robbed me, and done
me a deadly hurt. Ach, thought I, Emelyanoushka, Emelyanoushka! And Emelyanoushka, sir, went on
drinking for a whole fortnight without stopping. He was drunk all the time, and regularly besotted. He went
out in the morning and came back late at night, and for a whole fortnight I didn't get a word out of him. It
was as though grief was gnawing at his heart, or as though he wanted to do for himself completely. At last he
stopped; he must have come to the end of all he'd got, and then he sat in the window again. I remember he
sat there without speaking for three days and three nights; all of a sudden I saw that he was crying. He was
just sitting there, sir, and crying like anything; a perfect stream, as though he didn't know how his tears were
flowing. And it's a sad thing, sir, to see a grown-up man and an old man, too, crying from woe and grief.
"'What's the matter, Emelyanoushka?' said I.
"He began to tremble so that he shook all over. I spoke to him for the first time since that evening.

"'Nothing, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'God be with you, Emelyanoushka, what's lost is lost. Why are you moping about like this?' I felt sorry for
him.
"'Oh, nothing, Astafy Ivanovitch, it's no matter. I want to find some work to do, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'And what sort of work, pray, Emelyanoushka?'
"'Why, any sort; perhaps I could find a situation such as I used to have. I've been already to ask Fedosay
Ivanitch. I don't like to be a burden on you, Astafy Ivanovitch. If I can find a situation, Astafy Ivanovitch,
then I'll pay it you all back, and make you a return for all your hospitality.'
"'Enough, Emelyanoushka, enough; let bygones be bygones—and no more to be said about it. Let us go on
as we used to do before.'
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch, you, maybe, think—but I never touched your riding breeches.'
"'Well, have it your own way; God be with you, Emelyanoushka.'
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch, I can't go on living with you, that's clear. You must excuse me, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'Why, God bless you, Emelyan Ilyitch, who's offending you and driving you out of the place—am I doing
it?'
"'No, it's not the proper thing for me to live with you like this, Astafy Ivanovitch. I'd better be going.'
"He was so hurt, it seemed, he stuck to his point. I looked at him, and sure enough, up he got and pulled his
old coat over his shoulders.
"'But where are you going, Emelyan Ilyitch? Listen to reason: what are you about? Where are you off to?'
"'No, good-bye, Astafy Ivanovitch, don't keep me now'—and he was blubbering again—'I'd better be going.
You're not the same now.'
"'Not the same as what? I am the same. But you'll be lost by yourself like a poor helpless babe, Emelyan
Ilyitch.'
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch, when you go out now, you lock up your chest and it makes me cry to see it, Astafy
Ivanovitch. You'd better let me go, Astafy Ivanovitch, and forgive me all the trouble I've given you while I've
been living with you.'
"Well, sir, the man went away. I waited for a day; I expected he'd be back in the evening—no. Next day no
sign of him, nor the third day either. I began to get frightened; I was so worried, I couldn't drink, I couldn't
eat, I couldn't sleep. The fellow had quite disarmed me. On the fourth day I went out to look for him; I
peeped into all the taverns, to inquire for him—but no, Emelyanoushka was lost. 'Have you managed to
keep yourself alive, Emelyanoushka?' I wondered. 'Perhaps he is lying dead under some hedge, poor

drunkard, like a sodden log.' I went home more dead than alive. Next day I went out to look for him again.
And I kept cursing myself that I'd been such a fool as to let the man go off by himself. On the fifth day it
was a holiday—in the early morning I heard the door creak. I looked up and there was my Emelyanoushka
coming in. His face was blue and his hair was covered with dirt as though he'd been sleeping in the street; he
was as thin as a match. He took off his old coat, sat down on the chest and looked at me. I was delighted to
see him, but I felt more upset about him than ever. For you see, sir, if I'd been overtaken in some sin, as true
as I am here, sir, I'd have died like a dog before I'd have come back. But Emelyanoushka did come back.
And a sad thing it was, sure enough, to see a man sunk so low. I began to look after him, to talk kindly to
him, to comfort him.
"'Well, Emelyanoushka,' said I, 'I am glad you've come back. Had you been away much longer I should
have gone to look for you in the taverns again to-day. Are you hungry?'
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'Come, now, aren't you really? Here, brother, is some cabbage soup left over from yesterday; there was meat
in it; it is good stuff. And here is some bread and onion. Come, eat it, it'll do you no harm.'
"I made him eat it, and I saw at once that the man had not tasted food for maybe three days—he was as
hungry as a wolf. So it was hunger that had driven him to me. My heart was melted looking at the poor
dear. 'Let me run to the tavern,' thought I, 'I'll get something to ease his heart, and then we'll make an end
of it. I've no more anger in my heart against you, Emelyanoushka!' I brought him some vodka. 'Here,
Emelyan Ilyitch, let us have a drink for the holiday. Like a drink? And it will do you good.' He held out his
hand, held it out greedily; he was just taking it, and then he stopped himself. But a minute after I saw him
take it, and lift it to his mouth, spilling it on his sleeve. But though he got it to his lips he set it down on the
table again.
"'What is it, Emelyanoushka?'
"'Nothing, Astafy Ivanovitch, I—sort of——'
"'Won't you drink it?'
"'Well, Astafy Ivanovitch, I'm not—sort of—going to drink any more, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'Do you mean you've given it up altogether, Emelyanoushka, or are you only not going to drink to-day?'
"He did not answer. A minute later I saw him rest his head on his hand.
"'What's the matter, Emelyanoushka, are you ill?'
"'Why, yes, Astafy Ivanovitch, I don't feel well.'
"I took him and laid him down on the bed. I saw that he really was ill: his head was burning hot and he was
shivering with fever. I sat by him all day; towards night he was worse. I mixed him some oil and onion and
kvass and bread broken up.

"'Come, eat some of this,' said I, 'and perhaps you'll be better.' He shook his head. 'No,' said he, 'I won't
have any dinner to-day, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"I made some tea for him, I quite flustered our old woman—he was no better. Well, thinks I, it's a bad
look-out! The third morning I went for a medical gentleman. There was one I knew living close by,
Kostopravov by name. I'd made his acquaintance when I was in service with the Bosomyagins; he'd attended
me. The doctor come and looked at him. 'He's in a bad way,' said he, 'it was no use sending for me. But if
you like I can give him a powder.' Well, I didn't give him a powder, I thought that's just the doctor's little
game; and then the fifth day came.
"He lay, sir, dying before my eyes. I sat in the window with my work in my hands. The old woman was
heating the stove. We were all silent. My heart was simply breaking over him, the good-for-nothing fellow; I
felt as if it were a son of my own I was losing. I knew that Emelyanoushka was looking at me. I'd seen the
man all the day long making up his mind to say something and not daring to.
"At last I looked up at him; I saw such misery in the poor fellow's eyes. He had kept them fixed on me, but
when he saw that I was looking at him, he looked down at once.
"'Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'What is it, Emelyanoushka?'
"'If you were to take my old coat to a second-hand dealer's, how much do you think they'd give you for it,
Astafy Ivanovitch?'
"'There's no knowing how much they'd give. Maybe they would give me a rouble for it, Emelyan Ilyitch.'
"But if I had taken it they wouldn't have given a farthing for it, but would have laughed in my face for
bringing such a trumpery thing. I simply said that to comfort the poor fellow, knowing the simpleton he
was.
"'But I was thinking, Astafy Ivanovitch, they might give you three roubles for it; it's made of cloth, Astafy
Ivanovitch. How could they only give one rouble for a cloth coat?'
"'I don't know, Emelyan Ilyitch,' said I, 'if you are thinking of taking it you should certainly ask three
roubles to begin with.'
"Emelyanoushka was silent for a time, and then he addressed me again—
"'Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'What is it, Emelyanoushka?' I asked.
"'Sell my coat when I die, and don't bury me in it. I can lie as well without it; and it's a thing of some
value—it might come in useful.'

"I can't tell you how it made my heart ache to hear him. I saw that the death agony was coming on him. We
were silent again for a bit. So an hour passed by. I looked at him again: he was still staring at me, and when
he met my eyes he looked down again.
"'Do you want some water to drink, Emelyan Ilyitch?' I asked.
"'Give me some, God bless you, Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"I gave him a drink.
"'Thank you, Astafy Ivanovitch,' said he.
"'Is there anything else you would like, Emelyanoushka?'
"'No, Astafy Ivanovitch, there's nothing I want, but I—sort of——'
"'What?'
"'I only——'
"'What is it, Emelyanoushka?'
"'Those riding breeches——it was——sort of——I who took them——Astafy Ivanovitch.'
"'Well, God forgive you, Emelyanoushka,' said I, 'you poor, sorrowful creature. Depart in peace.'
"And I was choking myself, sir, and the tears were in my eyes. I turned aside for a moment.
"'Astafy Ivanovitch——'
"I saw Emelyanoushka wanted to tell me something; he was trying to sit up, trying to speak, and mumbling
something. He flushed red all over suddenly, looked at me ... then I saw him turn white again, whiter and
whiter, and he seemed to sink away all in a minute. His head fell back, he drew one breath and gave up his
soul to God."

God Sees the Truth, But Waits by Leo Tolstoy
In the town of Vladimir lived a young merchant named Ivan Dmitrich Aksionov. He had two shops and a
house of his own.
Aksionov was a handsome, fair-haired, curly-headed fellow, full of fun, and very fond of singing. When
quite a young man he had been given to drink, and was riotous when he had had too much; but after he
married he gave up drinking, except now and then.
One summer Aksionov was going to the Nizhny Fair, and as he bade good-bye to his family, his wife said to
him, "Ivan Dmitrich, do not start to-day; I have had a bad dream about you."
Aksionov laughed, and said, "You are afraid that when I get to the fair I shall go on a spree."
His wife replied: "I do not know what I am afraid of; all I know is that I had a bad dream. I dreamt you
returned from the town, and when you took off your cap I saw that your hair was quite grey."
Aksionov laughed. "That's a lucky sign," said he. "See if I don't sell out all my goods, and bring you some
presents from the fair."
So he said good-bye to his family, and drove away.
When he had travelled half-way, he met a merchant whom he knew, and they put up at the same inn for the
night. They had some tea together, and then went to bed in adjoining rooms.
It was not Aksionov's habit to sleep late, and, wishing to travel while it was still cool, he aroused his driver
before dawn, and told him to put in the horses.
Then he made his way across to the landlord of the inn (who lived in a cottage at the back), paid his bill,
and continued his journey.
When he had gone about twenty-five miles, he stopped for the horses to be fed. Aksionov rested awhile in
the passage of the inn, then he stepped out into the porch, and, ordering a samovar to be heated, got out his
guitar and began to play.
Suddenly a troika drove up with tinkling bells and an official alighted, followed by two soldiers. He came to
Aksionov and began to question him, asking him who he was and whence he came. Aksionov answered him
fully, and said, "Won't you have some tea with me?" But the official went on cross-questioning him and
asking him. "Where did you spend last night? Were you alone, or with a fellow-merchant? Did you see the
other merchant this morning? Why did you leave the inn before dawn?"
Aksionov wondered why he was asked all these questions, but he described all that had happened, and then
added, "Why do you cross-question me as if I were a thief or a robber? I am travelling on business of my
own, and there is no need to question me."

Then the official, calling the soldiers, said, "I am the police-officer of this district, and I question you
because the merchant with whom you spent last night has been found with his throat cut. We must search
your things."
They entered the house. The soldiers and the police-officer unstrapped Aksionov's luggage and searched it.
Suddenly the officer drew a knife out of a bag, crying, "Whose knife is this?"
Aksionov looked, and seeing a blood-stained knife taken from his bag, he was frightened.
"How is it there is blood on this knife?"
Aksionov tried to answer, but could hardly utter a word, and only stammered: "I—don't know—not mine."
Then the police-officer said: "This morning the merchant was found in bed with his throat cut. You are the
only person who could have done it. The house was locked from inside, and no one else was there. Here is
this blood-stained knife in your bag and your face and manner betray you! Tell me how you killed him, and
how much money you stole?"
Aksionov swore he had not done it; that he had not seen the merchant after they had had tea together; that
he had no money except eight thousand rubles of his own, and that the knife was not his. But his voice was
broken, his face pale, and he trembled with fear as though he went guilty.
The police-officer ordered the soldiers to bind Aksionov and to put him in the cart. As they tied his feet
together and flung him into the cart, Aksionov crossed himself and wept. His money and goods were taken
from him, and he was sent to the nearest town and imprisoned there. Enquiries as to his character were
made in Vladimir. The merchants and other inhabitants of that town said that in former days he used to
drink and waste his time, but that he was a good man. Then the trial came on: he was charged with
murdering a merchant from Ryazan, and robbing him of twenty thousand rubles.
His wife was in despair, and did not know what to believe. Her children were all quite small; one was a baby
at her breast. Taking them all with her, she went to the town where her husband was in jail. At first she was
not allowed to see him; but after much begging, she obtained permission from the officials, and was taken to
him. When she saw her husband in prison-dress and in chains, shut up with thieves and criminals, she fell
down, and did not come to her senses for a long time. Then she drew her children to her, and sat down near
him. She told him of things at home, and asked about what had happened to him. He told her all, and she
asked, "What can we do now?"
"We must petition the Czar not to let an innocent man perish."
His wife told him that she had sent a petition to the Czar, but it had not been accepted.
Aksionov did not reply, but only looked downcast.
Then his wife said, "It was not for nothing I dreamt your hair had turned grey. You remember? You should
not have started that day." And passing her fingers through his hair, she said: "Vanya dearest, tell your wife
the truth; was it not you who did it?"

"So you, too, suspect me!" said Aksionov, and, hiding his face in his hands, he began to weep. Then a soldier
came to say that the wife and children must go away; and Aksionov said good-bye to his family for the last
time.
When they were gone, Aksionov recalled what had been said, and when he remembered that his wife also
had suspected him, he said to himself, "It seems that only God can know the truth; it is to Him alone we
must appeal, and from Him alone expect mercy."
And Aksionov wrote no more petitions; gave up all hope, and only prayed to God.
Aksionov was condemned to be flogged and sent to the mines. So he was flogged with a knot, and when the
wounds made by the knot were healed, he was driven to Siberia with other convicts.
For twenty-six years Aksionov lived as a convict in Siberia. His hair turned white as snow, and his beard
grew long, thin, and grey. All his mirth went; he stooped; he walked slowly, spoke little, and never laughed,
but he often prayed.
In prison Aksionov learnt to make boots, and earned a little money, with which he bought The Lives of the
Saints. He read this book when there was light enough in the prison; and on Sundays in the prison-church
he read the lessons and sang in the choir; for his voice was still good.
The prison authorities liked Aksionov for his meekness, and his fellow-prisoners respected him: they called
him "Grandfather," and "The Saint." When they wanted to petition the prison authorities about anything,
they always made Aksionov their spokesman, and when there were quarrels among the prisoners they came
to him to put things right, and to judge the matter.
No news reached Aksionov from his home, and he did not even know if his wife and children were still
alive.
One day a fresh gang of convicts came to the prison. In the evening the old prisoners collected round the
new ones and asked them what towns or villages they came from, and what they were sentenced for. Among
the rest Aksionov sat down near the newcomers, and listened with downcast air to what was said.
One of the new convicts, a tall, strong man of sixty, with a closely-cropped grey beard, was telling the others
what he had been arrested for.
"Well, friends," he said, "I only took a horse that was tied to a sledge, and I was arrested and accused of
stealing. I said I had only taken it to get home quicker, and had then let it go; besides, the driver was a
personal friend of mine. So I said, 'It's all right.' 'No,' said they, 'you stole it.' But how or where I stole it
they could not say. I once really did something wrong, and ought by rights to have come here long ago, but
that time I was not found out. Now I have been sent here for nothing at all… Eh, but it's lies I'm telling
you; I've been to Siberia before, but I did not stay long."
"Where are you from?" asked some one.
"From Vladimir. My family is of that town. My name is Makar, and they also call me Semyonich."

Aksionov raised his head and said: "Tell me, Semyonich, do you know anything of the merchants Aksionov
of Vladimir? Are they still alive?"
"Know them? Of course I do. The Aksionovs are rich, though their father is in Siberia: a sinner like
ourselves, it seems! As for you, Gran'dad, how did you come here?"
Aksionov did not like to speak of his misfortune. He only sighed, and said, "For my sins I have been in
prison these twenty-six years."
"What sins?" asked Makar Semyonich.
But Aksionov only said, "Well, well—I must have deserved it!" He would have said no more, but his
companions told the newcomers how Aksionov came to be in Siberia; how some one had killed a merchant,
and had put the knife among Aksionov's things, and Aksionov had been unjustly condemned.
When Makar Semyonich heard this, he looked at Aksionov, slapped his own knee, and exclaimed, "Well,
this is wonderful! Really wonderful! But how old you've grown, Gran'dad!"
The others asked him why he was so surprised, and where he had seen Aksionov before; but Makar
Semyonich did not reply. He only said:
"It's wonderful that we should meet here, lads!"
These words made Aksionov wonder whether this man knew who had killed the merchant; so he said,
"Perhaps, Semyonich, you have heard of that affair, or maybe you've seen me before?"
"How could I help hearing? The world's full of rumours. But it's a long time ago, and I've forgotten what I
heard."
"Perhaps you heard who killed the merchant?" asked Aksionov.
Makar Semyonich laughed, and replied: "It must have been him in whose bag the knife was found! If some
one else hid the knife there, 'He's not a thief till he's caught,' as the saying is. How could any one put a knife
into your bag while it was under your head? It would surely have woke you up."
When Aksionov heard these words, he felt sure this was the man who had killed the merchant. He rose and
went away. All that night Aksionov lay awake. He felt terribly unhappy, and all sorts of images rose in his
mind. There was the image of his wife as she was when he parted from her to go to the fair. He saw her as if
she were present; her face and her eyes rose before him; he heard her speak and laugh. Then he saw his
children, quite little, as they: were at that time: one with a little cloak on, another at his mother's breast. And
then he remembered himself as he used to be-young and merry. He remembered how he sat playing the
guitar in the porch of the inn where he was arrested, and how free from care he had been. He saw, in his
mind, the place where he was flogged, the executioner, and the people standing around; the chains, the
convicts, all the twenty-six years of his prison life, and his premature old age. The thought of it all made him
so wretched that he was ready to kill himself.

"And it's all that villain's doing!" thought Aksionov. And his anger was so great against Makar Semyonich
that he longed for vengeance, even if he himself should perish for it. He kept repeating prayers all night, but
could get no peace. During the day he did not go near Makar Semyonich, nor even look at him.
A fortnight passed in this way. Aksionov could not sleep at night, and was so miserable that he did not know
what to do.
One night as he was walking about the prison he noticed some earth that came rolling out from under one
of the shelves on which the prisoners slept. He stopped to see what it was. Suddenly Makar Semyonich crept
out from under the shelf, and looked up at Aksionov with frightened face. Aksionov tried to pass without
looking at him, but Makar seized his hand and told him that he had dug a hole under the wall, getting rid of
the earth by putting it into his high-boots, and emptying it out every day on the road when the prisoners
were driven to their work.
"Just you keep quiet, old man, and you shall get out too. If you blab, they'll flog the life out of me, but I will
kill you first."
Aksionov trembled with anger as he looked at his enemy. He drew his hand away, saying, "I have no wish to
escape, and you have no need to kill me; you killed me long ago! As to telling of you—I may do so or not, as
God shall direct."
Next day, when the convicts were led out to work, the convoy soldiers noticed that one or other of the
prisoners emptied some earth out of his boots. The prison was searched and the tunnel found. The
Governor came and questioned all the prisoners to find out who had dug the hole. They all denied any
knowledge of it. Those who knew would not betray Makar Semyonich, knowing he would be flogged
almost to death. At last the Governor turned to Aksionov whom he knew to be a just man, and said:
"You are a truthful old man; tell me, before God, who dug the hole?"
Makar Semyonich stood as if he were quite unconcerned, looking at the Governor and not so much as
glancing at Aksionov. Aksionov's lips and hands trembled, and for a long time he could not utter a word. He
thought, "Why should I screen him who ruined my life? Let him pay for what I have suffered. But if I tell,
they will probably flog the life out of him, and maybe I suspect him wrongly. And, after all, what good
would it be to me?"
"Well, old man," repeated the Governor, "tell me the truth: who has been digging under the wall?"
Aksionov glanced at Makar Semyonich, and said, "I cannot say, your honour. It is not God's will that I
should tell! Do what you like with me; I am your hands."
However much the Governor tried, Aksionov would say no more, and so the matter had to be left.
That night, when Aksionov was lying on his bed and just beginning to doze, some one came quietly and sat
down on his bed. He peered through the darkness and recognised Makar.
"What more do you want of me?" asked Aksionov. "Why have you come here?"

Makar Semyonich was silent. So Aksionov sat up and said, "What do you want? Go away, or I will call the
guard!"
Makar Semyonich bent close over Aksionov, and whispered, "IvanDmitrich, forgive me!"
"What for?" asked Aksionov.
"It was I who killed the merchant and hid the knife among your things. I meant to kill you too, but I heard
a noise outside, so I hid the knife in your bag and escaped out of the window."
Aksionov was silent, and did not know what to say. Makar Semyonich slid off the bed-shelf and knelt upon
the ground. "Ivan Dmitrich," said he, "forgive me! For the love of God, forgive me! I will confess that it was
I who killed the merchant, and you will be released and can go to your home."
"It is easy for you to talk," said Aksionov, "but I have suffered for you these twenty-six years. Where could I
go to now?… My wife is dead, and my children have forgotten me. I have nowhere to go…"
Makar Semyonich did not rise, but beat his head on the floor. "Ivan Dmitrich, forgive me!" he cried. "When
they flogged me with the knot it was not so hard to bear as it is to see you now … yet you had pity on me,
and did not tell. For Christ's sake forgive me, wretch that I am!" And he began to sob.
When Aksionov heard him sobbing he, too, began to weep. "God will forgive you!" said he. "Maybe I am a
hundred times worse than you." And at these words his heart grew light, and the longing for home left him.
He no longer had any desire to leave the prison, but only hoped for his last hour to come.
In spite of what Aksionov had said, Makar Semyonich confessed, his guilt. But when the order for his release
came, Aksionov was already dead.

The Darling by Anton Chekov
Olenka, the daughter of the retired collegiate assessor Plemyanikov, was sitting on the back-door steps of her
house doing nothing. It was hot, the flies were nagging and teasing, and it was pleasant to think that it
would soon be evening. Dark rain clouds were gathering from the east, wafting a breath of moisture every
now and then.
Kukin, who roomed in the wing of the same house, was standing in the yard looking up at the sky. He was
the manager of the Tivoli, an open-air theatre.
"Again," he said despairingly. "Rain again. Rain, rain, rain! Every day rain! As though to spite me. I might as
well stick my head into a noose and be done with it. It's ruining me. Heavy losses every day!" He wrung his
hands, and continued, addressing Olenka: "What a life, Olga Semyonovna! It's enough to make a man
weep. He works, he does his best, his very best, he tortures himself, he passes sleepless nights, he thinks and
thinks and thinks how to do everything just right. And what's the result? He gives the public the best
operetta, the very best pantomime, excellent artists. But do they want it? Have they the least appreciation of
it? The public is rude. The public is a great boor. The public wants a circus, a lot of nonsense, a lot of stuff.
And there's the weather. Look! Rain almost every evening. It began to rain on the tenth of May, and it's
kept it up through the whole of June. It's simply awful. I can't get any audiences, and don't I have to pay
rent? Don't I have to pay the actors?"
The next day towards evening the clouds gathered again, and Kukin said with an hysterical laugh:
"Oh, I don't care. Let it do its worst. Let it drown the whole theatre, and me, too. All right, no luck for me
in this world or the next. Let the actors bring suit against me and drag me to court. What's the court? Why
not Siberia at hard labour, or even the scaffold? Ha, ha, ha!"
It was the same on the third day.
Olenka listened to Kukin seriously, in silence. Sometimes tears would rise to her eyes. At last Kukin's
misfortune touched her. She fell in love with him. He was short, gaunt, with a yellow face, and curly hair
combed back from his forehead, and a thin tenor voice. His features puckered all up when he spoke. Despair
was ever inscribed on his face. And yet he awakened in Olenka a sincere, deep feeling.
She was always loving somebody. She couldn't get on without loving somebody. She had loved her sick
father, who sat the whole time in his armchair in a darkened room, breathing heavily. She had loved her
aunt, who came from Brianska once or twice a year to visit them. And before that, when a pupil at the
progymnasium, she had loved her French teacher. She was a quiet, kind-hearted, compassionate girl, with a
soft gentle way about her. And she made a very healthy, wholesome impression. Looking at her full, rosy
cheeks, at her soft white neck with the black mole, and at the good naïve smile that always played on her
face when something pleasant was said, the men would think, "Not so bad," and would smile too; and the
lady visitors, in the middle of the conversation, would suddenly grasp her hand and exclaim, "You darling!"
in a burst of delight.
The house, hers by inheritance, in which she had lived from birth, was located at the outskirts of the city on
the Gypsy Road, not far from the Tivoli. From early evening till late at night she could hear the music in the

theatre and the bursting of the rockets; and it seemed to her that Kukin was roaring and battling with his
fate and taking his chief enemy, the indifferent public, by assault. Her heart melted softly, she felt no desire
to sleep, and when Kukin returned home towards morning, she tapped on her window-pane, and through
the curtains he saw her face and one shoulder and the kind smile she gave him.
He proposed to her, and they were married. And when he had a good look of her neck and her full vigorous
shoulders, he clapped his hands and said:
"You darling!"
He was happy. But it rained on their wedding-day, and the expression of despair never left his face.
They got along well together. She sat in the cashier's box, kept the theatre in order, wrote down the
expenses, and paid out the salaries. Her rosy cheeks, her kind naïve smile, like a halo around her face, could
be seen at the cashier's window, behind the scenes, and in the café. She began to tell her friends that the
theatre was the greatest, the most important, the most essential thing in the world, that it was the only place
to obtain true enjoyment in and become humanised and educated.
"But do you suppose the public appreciates it?" she asked. "What the public wants is the circus. Yesterday
Vanichka and I gave Faust Burlesqued, and almost all the boxes were empty. If we had given some silly
nonsense, I assure you, the theatre would have been overcrowded. To-morrow we'll put Orpheus in Hades
on. Do come."
Whatever Kukin said about the theatre and the actors, she repeated. She spoke, as he did, with contempt of
the public, of its indifference to art, of its boorishness. She meddled in the rehearsals, corrected the actors,
watched the conduct of the musicians; and when an unfavourable criticism appeared in the local paper, she
wept and went to the editor to argue with him.
The actors were fond of her and called her "Vanichka and I" and "the darling." She was sorry for them and
lent them small sums. When they bilked her, she never complained to her husband; at the utmost she shed a
few tears.
In winter, too, they got along nicely together. They leased a theatre in the town for the whole winter and
sublet it for short periods to a Little Russian theatrical company, to a conjuror and to the local amateur
players.
Olenka grew fuller and was always beaming with contentment; while Kukin grew thinner and yellower and
complained of his terrible losses, though he did fairly well the whole winter. At night he coughed, and she
gave him raspberry syrup and lime water, rubbed him with eau de Cologne, and wrapped him up in soft
coverings.
"You are my precious sweet," she said with perfect sincerity, stroking his hair. "You are such a dear."
At Lent he went to Moscow to get his company together, and, while without him, Olenka was unable to
sleep. She sat at the window the whole time, gazing at the stars. She likened herself to the hens that are also
uneasy and unable to sleep when their rooster is out of the coop. Kukin was detained in Moscow. He wrote
he would be back during Easter Week, and in his letters discussed arrangements already for the Tivoli. But

late one night, before Easter Monday, there was an ill-omened knocking at the wicket-gate. It was like a
knocking on a barrel—boom, boom, boom! The sleepy cook ran barefooted, plashing through the puddles,
to open the gate.
"Open the gate, please," said some one in a hollow bass voice. "I have a telegram for you."
Olenka had received telegrams from her husband before; but this time, somehow, she was numbed with
terror. She opened the telegram with trembling hands and read:
"Ivan Petrovich died suddenly to-day. Awaiting propt orders for wuneral Tuesday."
That was the way the telegram was written—"wuneral"—and another unintelligible word—"propt." The
telegram was signed by the manager of the opera company.
"My dearest!" Olenka burst out sobbing. "Vanichka, my dearest, my sweetheart. Why did I ever meet you?
Why did I ever get to know you and love you? To whom have you abandoned your poor Olenka, your poor,
unhappy Olenka?"
Kukin was buried on Tuesday in the Vagankov Cemetery in Moscow. Olenka returned home on
Wednesday; and as soon as she entered her house she threw herself on her bed and broke into such loud
sobbing that she could be heard in the street and in the neighbouring yards.
"The darling!" said the neighbours, crossing themselves. "How Olga
Semyonovna, the poor darling, is grieving!"
Three months afterwards Olenka was returning home from mass, downhearted and in deep mourning.
Beside her walked a man also returning from church, Vasily Pustovalov, the manager of the merchant
Babakayev's lumber-yard. He was wearing a straw hat, a white vest with a gold chain, and looked more like a
landowner than a business man.
"Everything has its ordained course, Olga Semyonovna," he said sedately, with sympathy in his voice. "And
if any one near and dear to us dies, then it means it was God's will and we should remember that and bear it
with submission."
He took her to the wicket-gate, said good-bye and went away. After that she heard his sedate voice the whole
day; and on closing her eyes she instantly had a vision of his dark beard. She took a great liking to him. And
evidently he had been impressed by her, too; for, not long after, an elderly woman, a distant acquaintance,
came in to have a cup of coffee with her. As soon as the woman was seated at table she began to speak about
Pustovalov—how good he was, what a steady man, and any woman could be glad to get him as a husband.
Three days later Pustovalov himself paid Olenka a visit. He stayed only about ten minutes, and spoke little,
but Olenka fell in love with him, fell in love so desperately that she did not sleep the whole night and
burned as with fever. In the morning she sent for the elderly woman. Soon after, Olenka and Pustovalov
were engaged, and the wedding followed.
Pustovalov and Olenka lived happily together. He usually stayed in the lumber-yard until dinner, then went
out on business. In his absence Olenka took his place in the office until evening, attending to the bookkeeping and despatching the orders.

"Lumber rises twenty per cent every year nowadays," she told her customers and acquaintances. "Imagine,
we used to buy wood from our forests here. Now Vasichka has to go every year to the government of
Mogilev to get wood. And what a tax!" she exclaimed, covering her cheeks with her hands in terror. "What a
tax!"
She felt as if she had been dealing in lumber for ever so long, that the most important and essential thing in
life was lumber. There was something touching and endearing in the way she pronounced the words,
"beam," "joist," "plank," "stave," "lath," "gun-carriage," "clamp." At night she dreamed of whole mountains
of boards and planks, long, endless rows of wagons conveying the wood somewhere, far, far from the city.
She dreamed that a whole regiment of beams, 36 ft. x 5 in., were advancing in an upright position to do
battle against the lumber-yard; that the beams and joists and clamps were knocking against each other,
emitting the sharp crackling reports of dry wood, that they were all falling and then rising again, piling on
top of each other. Olenka cried out in her sleep, and Pustovalov said to her gently:
"Olenka my dear, what is the matter? Cross yourself."
Her husband's opinions were all hers. If he thought the room was too hot, she thought so too. If he thought
business was dull, she thought business was dull. Pustovalov was not fond of amusements and stayed home
on holidays; she did the same.
"You are always either at home or in the office," said her friends.
"Why don't you go to the theatre or to the circus, darling?"
"Vasichka and I never go to the theatre," she answered sedately. "We have work to do, we have no time for
nonsense. What does one get out of going to theatre?"
On Saturdays she and Pustovalov went to vespers, and on holidays to early mass. On returning home they
walked side by side with rapt faces, an agreeable smell emanating from both of them and her silk dress
rustling pleasantly. At home they drank tea with milk-bread and various jams, and then ate pie. Every day at
noontime there was an appetising odour in the yard and outside the gate of cabbage soup, roast mutton, or
duck; and, on fast days, of fish. You couldn't pass the gate without being seized by an acute desire to eat.
The samovar was always boiling on the office table, and customers were treated to tea and biscuits. Once a
week the married couple went to the baths and returned with red faces, walking side by side.
"We are getting along very well, thank God," said Olenka to her friends. "God grant that all should live as
well as Vasichka and I."
When Pustovalov went to the government of Mogilev to buy wood, she was dreadfully homesick for him,
did not sleep nights, and cried. Sometimes the veterinary surgeon of the regiment, Smirnov, a young man
who lodged in the wing of her house, came to see her evenings. He related incidents, or they played cards
together. This distracted her. The most interesting of his stories were those of his own life. He was married
and had a son; but he had separated from his wife because she had deceived him, and now he hated her and
sent her forty rubles a month for his son's support. Olenka sighed, shook her head, and was sorry for him.
"Well, the Lord keep you," she said, as she saw him off to the door by candlelight. "Thank you for coming
to kill time with me. May God give you health. Mother in Heaven!" She spoke very sedately, very
judiciously, imitating her husband. The veterinary surgeon had disappeared behind the door when she called

out after him: "Do you know, Vladimir Platonych, you ought to make up with your wife. Forgive her, if
only for the sake of your son. The child understands everything, you may be sure."
When Pustovalov returned, she told him in a low voice about the veterinary surgeon and his unhappy family
life; and they sighed and shook their heads, and talked about the boy who must be homesick for his father.
Then, by a strange association of ideas, they both stopped before the sacred images, made genuflections, and
prayed to God to send them children.
And so the Pustovalovs lived for full six years, quietly and peaceably, in perfect love and harmony. But once
in the winter Vasily Andreyich, after drinking some hot tea, went out into the lumber-yard without a hat on
his head, caught a cold and took sick. He was treated by the best physicians, but the malady progressed, and
he died after an illness of four months. Olenka was again left a widow.
"To whom have you left me, my darling?" she wailed after the funeral. "How shall I live now without you,
wretched creature that I am. Pity me, good people, pity me, fatherless and motherless, all alone in the
world!"
She went about dressed in black and weepers, and she gave up wearing hats and gloves for good. She hardly
left the house except to go to church and to visit her husband's grave. She almost led the life of a nun.
It was not until six months had passed that she took off the weepers and opened her shutters. She began to
go out occasionally in the morning to market with her cook. But how she lived at home and what went on
there, could only be surmised. It could be surmised from the fact that she was seen in her little garden
drinking tea with the veterinarian while he read the paper out loud to her, and also from the fact that once
on meeting an acquaintance at the post-office, she said to her:
"There is no proper veterinary inspection in our town. That is why there is so much disease. You constantly
hear of people getting sick from the milk and becoming infected by the horses and cows. The health of
domestic animals ought really to be looked after as much as that of human beings."
She repeated the veterinarian's words and held the same opinions as he about everything. It was plain that
she could not exist a single year without an attachment, and she found her new happiness in the wing of her
house. In any one else this would have been condemned; but no one could think ill of Olenka. Everything
in her life was so transparent. She and the veterinary surgeon never spoke about the change in their relations.
They tried, in fact, to conceal it, but unsuccessfully; for Olenka could have no secrets. When the surgeon's
colleagues from the regiment came to see him, she poured tea, and served the supper, and talked to them
about the cattle plague, the foot and mouth disease, and the municipal slaughter houses. The surgeon was
dreadfully embarrassed, and after the visitors had left, he caught her hand and hissed angrily:
"Didn't I ask you not to talk about what you don't understand? When we doctors discuss things, please
don't mix in. It's getting to be a nuisance."
She looked at him in astonishment and alarm, and asked:
"But, Volodichka, what am I to talk about?"

And she threw her arms round his neck, with tears in her eyes, and begged him not to be angry. And they
were both happy.
But their happiness was of short duration. The veterinary surgeon went away with his regiment to be gone
for good, when it was transferred to some distant place almost as far as Siberia, and Olenka was left alone.
Now she was completely alone. Her father had long been dead, and his armchair lay in the attic covered
with dust and minus one leg. She got thin and homely, and the people who met her on the street no longer
looked at her as they had used to, nor smiled at her. Evidently her best years were over, past and gone, and a
new, dubious life was to begin which it were better not to think about.
In the evening Olenka sat on the steps and heard the music playing and the rockets bursting in the Tivoli;
but it no longer aroused any response in her. She looked listlessly into the yard, thought of nothing, wanted
nothing, and when night came on, she went to bed and dreamed of nothing but the empty yard. She ate and
drank as though by compulsion.
And what was worst of all, she no longer held any opinions. She saw and understood everything that went
on around her, but she could not form an opinion about it. She knew of nothing to talk about. And how
dreadful not to have opinions! For instance, you see a bottle, or you see that it is raining, or you see a
muzhik riding by in a wagon. But what the bottle or the rain or the muzhik are for, or what the sense of
them all is, you cannot tell—you cannot tell, not for a thousand rubles. In the days of Kukin and Pustovalov
and then of the veterinary surgeon, Olenka had had an explanation for everything, and would have given her
opinion freely no matter about what. But now there was the same emptiness in her heart and brain as in her
yard. It was as galling and bitter as a taste of wormwood.
Gradually the town grew up all around. The Gypsy Road had become a street, and where the Tivoli and the
lumber-yard had been, there were now houses and a row of side streets. How quickly time flies! Olenka's
house turned gloomy, the roof rusty, the shed slanting. Dock and thistles overgrew the yard. Olenka herself
had aged and grown homely. In the summer she sat on the steps, and her soul was empty and dreary and
bitter. When she caught the breath of spring, or when the wind wafted the chime of the cathedral bells, a
sudden flood of memories would pour over her, her heart would expand with a tender warmth, and the tears
would stream down her cheeks. But that lasted only a moment. Then would come emptiness again, and the
feeling, What is the use of living? The black kitten Bryska rubbed up against her and purred softly, but the
little creature's caresses left Olenka untouched. That was not what she needed. What she needed was a love
that would absorb her whole being, her reason, her whole soul, that would give her ideas, an object in life,
that would warm her aging blood. And she shook the black kitten off her skirt angrily, saying:
"Go away! What are you doing here?"
And so day after day, year after year not a single joy, not a single opinion. Whatever Marva, the cook, said
was all right.
One hot day in July, towards evening, as the town cattle were being driven by, and the whole yard was filled
with clouds of dust, there was suddenly a knocking at the gate. Olenka herself went to open it, and was
dumbfounded to behold the veterinarian Smirnov. He had turned grey and was dressed as a civilian. All the
old memories flooded into her soul, she could not restrain herself, she burst out crying, and laid her head on

Smirnov's breast without saying a word. So overcome was she that she was totally unconscious of how they
walked into the house and seated themselves to drink tea.
"My darling!" she murmured, trembling with joy. "Vladimir Platonych, from where has God sent you?"
"I want to settle here for good," he told her. "I have resigned my position and have come here to try my
fortune as a free man and lead a settled life. Besides, it's time to send my boy to the gymnasium. He is
grown up now. You know, my wife and I have become reconciled."
"Where is she?" asked Olenka.
"At the hotel with the boy. I am looking for lodgings."
"Good gracious, bless you, take my house. Why won't my house do? Oh, dear! Why, I won't ask any rent of
you," Olenka burst out in the greatest excitement, and began to cry again. "You live here, and the wing will
be enough for me. Oh, Heavens, what a joy!"
The very next day the roof was being painted and the walls whitewashed, and Olenka, arms akimbo, was
going about the yard superintending. Her face brightened with her old smile. Her whole being revived and
freshened, as though she had awakened from a long sleep. The veterinarian's wife and child arrived. She was
a thin, plain woman, with a crabbed expression. The boy Sasha, small for his ten years of age, was a chubby
child, with clear blue eyes and dimples in his cheeks. He made for the kitten the instant he entered the yard,
and the place rang with his happy laughter.
"Is that your cat, auntie?" he asked Olenka. "When she has little kitties, please give me one. Mamma is
awfully afraid of mice."
Olenka chatted with him, gave him tea, and there was a sudden warmth in her bosom and a soft gripping at
her heart, as though the boy were her own son.
In the evening, when he sat in the dining-room studying his lessons, she looked at him tenderly and
whispered to herself:
"My darling, my pretty. You are such a clever child, so good to look at."
"An island is a tract of land entirely surrounded by water," he recited.
"An island is a tract of land," she repeated—the first idea asseverated with conviction after so many years of
silence and mental emptiness.
She now had her opinions, and at supper discussed with Sasha's parents how difficult the studies had
become for the children at the gymnasium, but how, after all, a classical education was better than a
commercial course, because when you graduated from the gymnasium then the road was open to you for
any career at all. If you chose to, you could become a doctor, or, if you wanted to, you could become an
engineer.

Sasha began to go to the gymnasium. His mother left on a visit to her sister in Kharkov and never came
back. The father was away every day inspecting cattle, and sometimes was gone three whole days at a time,
so that Sasha, it seemed to Olenka, was utterly abandoned, was treated as if he were quite superfluous, and
must be dying of hunger. So she transferred him into the wing along with herself and fixed up a little room
for him there.
Every morning Olenka would come into his room and find him sound asleep with his hand tucked under
his cheek, so quiet that he seemed not to be breathing. What a shame to have to wake him, she thought.
"Sashenka," she said sorrowingly, "get up, darling. It's time to go to the gymnasium."
He got up, dressed, said his prayers, then sat down to drink tea. He drank three glasses of tea, ate two large
cracknels and half a buttered roll. The sleep was not yet out of him, so he was a little cross.
"You don't know your fable as you should, Sashenka," said Olenka, looking at him as though he were
departing on a long journey. "What a lot of trouble you are. You must try hard and learn, dear, and mind
your teachers."
"Oh, let me alone, please," said Sasha.
Then he went down the street to the gymnasium, a little fellow wearing a large cap and carrying a satchel on
his back. Olenka followed him noiselessly.
"Sashenka," she called.
He looked round and she shoved a date or a caramel into his hand. When he reached the street of the
gymnasium, he turned around and said, ashamed of being followed by a tall, stout woman:
"You had better go home, aunt. I can go the rest of the way myself."
She stopped and stared after him until he had disappeared into the school entrance.
Oh, how she loved him! Not one of her other ties had been so deep. Never before had she given herself so
completely, so disinterestedly, so cheerfully as now that her maternal instincts were all aroused. For this boy,
who was not hers, for the dimples in his cheeks and for his big cap, she would have given her life, given it
with joy and with tears of rapture. Why? Ah, indeed, why?
When she had seen Sasha off to the gymnasium, she returned home quietly, content, serene, overflowing
with love. Her face, which had grown younger in the last half year, smiled and beamed. People who met her
were pleased as they looked at her.
"How are you, Olga Semyonovna, darling? How are you getting on, darling?"
"The gymnasium course is very hard nowadays," she told at the market. "It's no joke. Yesterday the first
class had a fable to learn by heart, a Latin translation, and a problem. How is a little fellow to do all that?"

And she spoke of the teacher and the lessons and the text-books, repeating exactly what Sasha said about
them.
At three o'clock they had dinner. In the evening they prepared the lessons together, and Olenka wept with
Sasha over the difficulties. When she put him to bed, she lingered a long time making the sign of the cross
over him and muttering a prayer. And when she lay in bed, she dreamed of the far-away, misty future when
Sasha would finish his studies and become a doctor or an engineer, have a large house of his own, with
horses and a carriage, marry and have children. She would fall asleep still thinking of the same things, and
tears would roll down her cheeks from her closed eyes. And the black cat would lie at her side purring: "Mrr,
mrr, mrr."
Suddenly there was a loud knocking at the gate. Olenka woke up breathless with fright, her heart beating
violently. Half a minute later there was another knock.
"A telegram from Kharkov," she thought, her whole body in a tremble.
"His mother wants Sasha to come to her in Kharkov. Oh, great God!"
She was in despair. Her head, her feet, her hands turned cold. There was no unhappier creature in the world,
she felt. But another minute passed, she heard voices. It was the veterinarian coming home from the club.
"Thank God," she thought. The load gradually fell from her heart, she was at ease again. And she went back
to bed, thinking of Sasha who lay fast asleep in the next room and sometimes cried out in his sleep:
"I'll give it to you! Get away! Quit your scrapping!"
