MR. PROHARTCHIN

I

n the darkest and humblest corner of Ustinya Fyodorovna’s flat lived Semyon
Ivanovitch Prohartchin, a well-meaning elderly man, who did not drink. Since Mr.
Prohartchin was of a very humble grade in the service, and received a salary strictly
proportionate to his official capacity, Ustinya Fyodorovna could not get more than five
roubles a month from him for his lodging. Some people said that she had her own reasons
for accepting him as a lodger; but, be that as it may, as though in despite of all his
detractors, Mr. Prohartchin actually became her favourite, in an honourable and virtuous
sense, of course. It must be observed that Ustinya Fyodorovna, a very respectable woman,
who had a special partiality for meat and coffee, and found it difficult to keep the fasts, let
rooms to several other boarders who paid twice as much as Semyon Ivanovitch, yet not
being quiet lodgers, but on the contrary all of them “spiteful scoffers” at her feminine
ways and her forlorn helplessness, stood very low in her good opinion, so that if it had not
been for the rent they paid, she would not have cared to let them stay, nor indeed to see
them in her flat at all. Semyon Ivanovitch had become her favourite from the day when a
retired, or, perhaps more correctly speaking, discharged clerk, with a weakness for strong
drink, was carried to his last resting-place in Volkovo. Though this gentleman had only
one eye, having had the other knocked out owing, in his own words, to his valiant
behaviour; and only one leg, the other having been broken in the same way owing to his
valour; yet he had succeeded in winning all the kindly feeling of which Ustinya
Fyodorovna was capable, and took the fullest advantage of it, and would probably have
gone on for years living as her devoted satellite and toady if he had not finally drunk
himself to death in the most pitiable way. All this had happened at Peski, where Ustinya
Fyodorovna only had three lodgers, of whom, when she moved into a new flat and set up
on a larger scale, letting to about a dozen new boarders, Mr. Prohartchin was the only one
who remained.
Whether Mr. Prohartchin had certain incorrigible defects, or whether his companions
were, every one of them, to blame, there seemed to be misunderstandings on both sides
from the first. We must observe here that all Ustinya Fyodorovna’s new lodgers without
exception got on together like brothers; some of them were in the same office; each one
of them by turns lost all his money to the others at faro, preference and bixe; they all
liked in a merry hour to enjoy what they called the fizzing moments of life in a crowd

together; they were fond, too, at times of discussing lofty subjects, and though in the end
things rarely passed off without a dispute, yet as all prejudices were banished from the
whole party the general harmony was not in the least disturbed thereby. The most
remarkable among the lodgers were Mark Ivanovitch, an intelligent and well-read man;
then Oplevaniev; then Prepolovenko, also a nice and modest person; then there was a
certain Zinovy Prokofyevitch, whose object in life was to get into aristocratic society; then
there was Okeanov, the copying clerk, who had in his time almost wrested the distinction
of prime favourite from Semyon Ivanovitch; then another copying clerk called Sudbin; the
plebeian Kantarev; there were others too. But to all these people Semyon Ivanovitch was,
as it were, not one of themselves. No one wished him harm, of course, for all had from
the very first done Prohartchin justice, and had decided in Mark Ivanovitch’s words that
he, Prohartchin, was a good and harmless fellow, though by no means a man of the world,
trustworthy, and not a flatterer, who had, of course, his failings; but that if he were
sometimes unhappy it was due to nothing else but lack of imagination. What is more, Mr.
Prohartchin, though deprived in this way of imagination, could never have made a
particularly favourable impression from his figure or manners (upon which scoffers are
fond of fastening), yet his figure did not put people against him. Mark Ivanovitch, who
was an intelligent person, formally undertook Semyon Ivanovitch’s defence, and declared
in rather happy and flowery language that Prohartchin was an elderly and respectable
man, who had long, long ago passed the age of romance. And so, if Semyon Ivanovitch did
not know how to get on with people, it must have been entirely his own fault.
The first thing they noticed was the unmistakable parsimony and niggardliness of
Semyon Ivanovitch. That was at once observed and noted, for Semyon Ivanovitch would
never lend any one his teapot, even for a moment; and that was the more unjust as he
himself hardly ever drank tea, but when he wanted anything drank, as a rule, rather a
pleasant decoction of wild flowers and certain medicinal herbs, of which he always had a
considerable store. His meals, too, were quite different from the other lodgers’. He never,
for instance, permitted himself to partake of the whole dinner, provided daily by Ustinya
Fyodorovna for the other boarders. The dinner cost half a rouble; Semyon Ivanovitch paid
only twenty-five kopecks in copper, and never exceeded it, and so took either a plate of
soup with pie, or a plate of beef; most frequently he ate neither soup nor beef, but he
partook in moderation of white bread with onion, curd, salted cucumber, or something
similar, which was a great deal cheaper, and he would only go back to his half rouble
dinner when he could stand it no longer. . . .

Here the biographer confesses that nothing would have induced him to allude to
such realistic and low details, positively shocking and offensive to some lovers of the
heroic style, if it were not that these details exhibit one peculiarity, one characteristic, in
the hero of this story; for Mr. Prohartchin was by no means so poor as to be unable to
have regular and sufficient meals, though he sometimes made out that he was. But he
acted as he did regardless of obloquy and people’s prejudices, simply to satisfy his strange
whims, and from frugality and excessive carefulness: all this, however, will be much
clearer later on. But we will beware of boring the reader with the description of all
Semyon Ivanovitch’s whims, and will omit, for instance, the curious and very amusing
description of his attire; and, in fact, if it were not for Ustinya Fyodorovna’s own
reference to it we should hardly have alluded even to the fact that Semyon Ivanovitch
never could make up his mind to send his linen to the wash, or if he ever did so it was so
rarely that in the intervals one might have completely forgotten the existence of linen on
Semyon Ivanovitch. From the landlady’s evidence it appeared that “Semyon Ivanovitch,
bless his soul, poor lamb, for twenty years had been tucked away in his corner, without
caring what folks thought, for all the days of his life on earth he was a stranger to socks,
handkerchiefs, and all such things,” and what is more, Ustinya Fyodorovna had seen with
her own eyes, thanks to the decrepitude of the screen, that the poor dear man sometimes
had had nothing to cover his bare skin.
Such were the rumours in circulation after Semyon Ivanovitch’s death. But in his
lifetime (and this was one of the most frequent occasions of dissension) he could not
endure it if any one, even somebody on friendly terms with him, poked his inquisitive
nose uninvited into his corner, even through an aperture in the decrepit screen. He was a
taciturn man difficult to deal with and prone to ill health. He did not like people to give
him advice, he did not care for people who put themselves forward either, and if any one
jeered at him or gave him advice unasked, he would fall foul of him at once, put him to
shame, and settle his business. “You are a puppy, you are a featherhead, you are not one
to give advice, so there — you mind your own business, sir. You’d better count the stitches
in your own socks, sir, so there!”
Semyon Ivanovitch was a plain man, and never used the formal mode of address to
any one. He could not bear it either when some one who knew his little ways would begin
from pure sport pestering him with questions, such as what he had in his little trunk. . . .
Semyon Ivanovitch had one little trunk. It stood under his bed, and was guarded like the
apple of his eye; and though every one knew that there was nothing in it except old rags,

two or three pairs of damaged boots and all sorts of rubbish, yet Mr. Prohartchin prized
his property very highly, and they used even to hear him at one time express
dissatisfaction with his old, but still sound, lock, and talk of getting a new one of a special
German pattern with a secret spring and various complications. When on one occasion
Zinovy Prokofyevitch, carried away by the thoughtlessness of youth, gave expression to
the very coarse and unseemly idea, that Semyon Ivanovitch was probably hiding and
treasuring something in his box to leave to his descendants, every one who happened to
be by was stupefied at the extraordinary effects of Zinovy Prokofyevitch’s sally. At first
Mr. Prohartchin could not find suitable terms for such a crude and coarse idea. For a long
time words dropped from his lips quite incoherently, and it was only after a while they
made out that Semyon Ivanovitch was reproaching Zinovy Prokofyevitch for some shabby
action in the remote past; then they realized that Semyon Ivanovitch was predicting that
Zinovy Prokofyevitch would never get into aristocratic society, and that the tailor to
whom he owed a bill for his suits would beat him — would certainly beat him — because
the puppy had not paid him for so long; and finally, “You puppy, you,” Semyon Ivanovitch
added, “here you want to get into the hussars, but you won’t, I tell you, you’ll make a fool
of yourself. And I tell you what, you puppy, when your superiors know all about it they
will take and make you a copying clerk; so that will be the end of it! Do you hear, puppy?”
Then Semyon Ivanovitch subsided, but after lying down for five hours, to the intense
astonishment of every one he seemed to have reached a decision, and began suddenly
reproaching and abusing the young man again, at first to himself and afterwards
addressing Zinovy Prokofyevitch. But the matter did not end there, and in the evening,
when Mark Ivanovitch and Prepolovenko made tea and asked Okeanov to drink it with
them, Semyon Ivanovitch got up from his bed, purposely joined them, subscribing his
fifteen or twenty kopecks, and on the pretext of a sudden desire for a cup of tea began at
great length going into the subject, and explaining that he was a poor man, nothing but a
poor man, and that a poor man like him had nothing to save. Mr. Prohartchin confessed
that he was a poor man on this occasion, he said, simply because the subject had come
up; that the day before yesterday he had meant to borrow a rouble from that impudent
fellow, but now he should not borrow it for fear the puppy should brag, that that was the
fact of the matter, and that his salary was such that one could not buy enough to eat, and
that finally, a poor man, as you see, he sent his sister-in-law in Tver five roubles every
month, that if he did not send his sister-in-law in Tver five roubles every month his
sister-in-law would die, and if his sister-in-law, who was dependent on him, were dead,

he, Semyon Ivanovitch, would long ago have bought himself a new suit. . . . And Semyon
Ivanovitch went on talking in this way at great length about being a poor man, about his
sister-in-law and about roubles, and kept repeating the same thing over and over again to
impress it on his audience till he got into a regular muddle and relapsed into silence. Only
three days later, when they had all forgotten about him, and no one was thinking of
attacking him, he added something in conclusion to the effect that when Zinovy
Prokofyevitch went into the hussars the impudent fellow would have his leg cut off in the
war, and then he would come with a wooden leg and say; “Semyon Ivanovitch, kind
friend, give me something to eat!” and then Semyon Ivanovitch would not give him
something to eat, and would not look at the insolent fellow; and that’s how it would be,
and he could just make the best of it.
All this naturally seemed very curious and at the same time fearfully amusing.
Without much reflection, all the lodgers joined together for further investigation, and
simply from curiosity determined to make a final onslaught on Semyon Ivanovitch en
masse. And as Mr. Prohartchin, too, had of late — that is, ever since he had begun living in
the same flat with them — been very fond of finding out everything about them and
asking inquisitive questions, probably for private reasons of his own, relations sprang up
between the opposed parties without any preparation or effort on either side, as it were by
chance and of itself. To get into relations Semyon Ivanovitch always had in reserve his
peculiar, rather sly, and very ingenuous manoeuvre, of which the reader has learned
something already. He would get off his bed about tea-time, and if he saw the others
gathered together in a group to make tea he would go up to them like a quiet, sensible,
and friendly person, hand over his twenty kopecks, as he was entitled to do, and announce
that he wished to join them. Then the young men would wink at one another, and so
indicating that they were in league together against Semyon Ivanovitch, would begin a
conversation, at first strictly proper and decorous. Then one of the wittier of the party
would, à propos of nothing, fall to telling them news consisting most usually of entirely
false and quite incredible details. He would say, for instance, that some one had heard His
Excellency that day telling Demid Vassilyevitch that in his opinion married clerks were
more trustworthy than unmarried, and more suitable for promotion; for they were steady,
and that their capacities were considerably improved by marriage, and that therefore he —
that is, the speaker — in order to improve and be better fitted for promotion, was doing
his utmost to enter the bonds of matrimony as soon as possible with a certain Fevronya
Prokofyevna. Or he would say that it had more than once been remarked about certain of

his colleagues that they were entirely devoid of social graces and of well-bred, agreeable
manners, and consequently unable to please ladies in good society, and that, therefore, to
eradicate this defect it would be suitable to deduct something from their salary, and with
the sum so obtained, to hire a hall, where they could learn to dance, acquire the outward
signs of gentlemanliness and good-breeding, courtesy, respect for their seniors, strength
of will, a good and grateful heart and various agreeable qualities. Or he would say that it
was being arranged that some of the clerks, beginning with the most elderly, were to be
put through an examination in all sorts of subjects to raise their standard of culture, and
in that way, the speaker would add, all sorts of things would come to light, and certain
gentlemen would have to lay their cards on the table — in short, thousands of similar very
absurd rumours were discussed. To keep it up, every one believed the story at once,
showed interest in it, asked questions, applied it to themselves; and some of them,
assuming a despondent air, began shaking their heads and asking every one’s advice,
saying what were they to do if they were to come under it? It need hardly be said that a
man far less credulous and simple-hearted than Mr. Prohartchin would have been puzzled
and carried away by a rumour so unanimously believed. Moreover, from all appearances,
it might be safely concluded that Semyon Ivanovitch was exceedingly stupid and slow to
grasp any new unusual idea, and that when he heard anything new, he had always first, as
it were, to chew it over and digest it, to find out the meaning, and struggling with it in
bewilderment, at last perhaps to overcome it, though even then in a quite special manner
peculiar to himself alone. . . .
In this way curious and hitherto unexpected qualities began to show themselves in
Semyon Ivanovitch. . . . Talk and tittle-tattle followed, and by devious ways it all reached
the office at last, with additions. What increased the sensation was the fact that Mr.
Prohartchin, who had looked almost exactly the same from time immemorial, suddenly, à
propos of nothing, wore quite a different countenance. His face was uneasy, his eyes were
timid and had a scared and rather suspicious expression. He took to walking softly,
starting and listening, and to put the finishing touch to his new characteristics developed
a passion for investigating the truth. He carried his love of truth at last to such a pitch as
to venture, on two occasions, to inquire of Demid Vassilyevitch himself concerning the
credibility of the strange rumours that reached him daily by dozens, and if we say nothing
here of the consequence of the action of Semyon Ivanovitch, it is for no other reason but
a sensitive regard for his reputation. It was in this way people came to consider him as
misanthropic and regardless of the proprieties. Then they began to discover that there

was a great deal that was fantastical about him, and in this they were not altogether
mistaken, for it was observed on more than one occasion that Semyon Ivanovitch
completely forgot himself, and sitting in his seat with his mouth open and his pen in the
air, as though frozen or petrified, looked more like the shadow of a rational being than
that rational being itself. It sometimes happened that some innocently gaping gentleman,
on suddenly catching his straying, lustreless, questioning eyes, was scared and all of a
tremor, and at once inserted into some important document either a smudge or some
quite inappropriate word. The impropriety of Semyon Ivanovitch’s behaviour
embarrassed and annoyed all really well-bred people. . . . At last no one could feel any
doubt of the eccentricity of Semyon Ivanovitch’s mind, when one fine morning the
rumour was all over the office that Mr. Prohartchin had actually frightened Demid
Vassilyevitch himself, for, meeting him in the corridor, Semyon Ivanovitch had been so
strange and peculiar that he had forced his superior to beat a retreat. . . . The news of
Semyon Ivanovitch’s behaviour reached him himself at last. Hearing of it he got up at
once, made his way carefully between the chairs and tables, reached the entry, took down
his overcoat with his own hand, put it on, went out, and disappeared for an indefinite
period. Whether he was led into this by alarm or some other impulse we cannot say, but
no trace was seen of him for a time either at home or at the office. . . .
We will not attribute Semyon Ivanovitch’s fate simply to his eccentricity, yet we must
observe to the reader that our hero was a very retiring man, unaccustomed to society, and
had, until he made the acquaintance of the new lodgers, lived in complete unbroken
solitude, and had been marked by his quietness and even a certain mysteriousness; for he
had spent all the time that he lodged at Peski lying on his bed behind the screen, without
talking or having any sort of relations with any one. Both his old fellow-lodgers lived
exactly as he did: they, too were, somehow mysterious people and spent fifteen years
lying behind their screens. The happy, drowsy hours and days trailed by, one after the
other, in patriarchal stagnation, and as everything around them went its way in the same
happy fashion, neither Semyon Ivanovitch nor Ustinya Fyodorovna could remember
exactly when fate had brought them together.
“It may be ten years, it may be twenty, it may be even twenty-five altogether,” she
would say at times to her new lodgers, “since he settled with me, poor dear man, bless his
heart!” And so it was very natural that the hero of our story, being so unaccustomed to
society was disagreeably surprised when, a year before, he, a respectable and modest man,
had found himself, suddenly in the midst of a noisy and boisterous crew, consisting of a

dozen young fellows, his colleagues at the office, and his new house-mates.
The disappearance of Semyon Ivanovitch made no little stir in the lodgings. One
thing was that he was the favourite; another, that his passport, which had been in the
landlady’s keeping, appeared to have been accidentally mislaid. Ustinya Fyodorovna
raised a howl, as was her invariable habit on all critical occasions. She spent two days in
abusing and upbraiding the lodgers. She wailed that they had chased away her lodger like
a chicken, and all those spiteful scoffers had been the ruin of him; and on the third day
she sent them all out to hunt for the fugitive and at all costs to bring him back, dead or
alive. Towards evening Sudbin first came back with the news that traces had been
discovered, that he had himself seen the runaway in Tolkutchy Market and other places,
had followed and stood close to him, but had not dared to speak to him; he had been near
him in a crowd watching a house on fire in Crooked Lane. Half an hour later Okeanov and
Kantarev came in and confirmed Sudbin’s story, word for word; they, too, had stood near,
had followed him quite close, had stood not more than ten paces from him, but they also
had not ventured to speak to him, but both observed that Semyon Ivanovitch was walking
with a drunken cadger. The other lodgers were all back and together at last, and after
listening attentively they made up their minds that Prohartchin could not be far off and
would not be long in returning; but they said that they had all known beforehand that he
was about with a drunken cadger. This drunken cadger was a thoroughly bad lot, insolent
and cringing, and it seemed evident that he had got round Semyon Ivanovitch in some
way. He had turned up just a week before Semyon Ivanovitch’s disappearance in company
with Remnev, had spent a little time in the flat telling them that he had suffered in the
cause of justice, that he had formerly been in the service in the provinces, that an
inspector had come down on them, that he and his associates had somehow suffered in a
good cause, that he had come to Petersburg and fallen at the feet of Porfiry Grigoryevitch,
that he had been got, by interest, into a department; but through the cruel persecution of
fate he had been discharged from there too, and that afterwards through reorganization
the office itself had ceased to exist, and that he had not been included in the new revised
staff of clerks owing as much to direct incapacity for official work as to capacity for
something else quite irrelevant — all this mixed up with his passion for justice and of
course the trickery of his enemies. After finishing his story, in the course of which Mr.
Zimoveykin more than once kissed his sullen and unshaven friend Remnev, he bowed
down to all in the room in turn, not forgetting Avdotya the servant, called them all his
benefactors, and explained that he was an undeserving, troublesome, mean, insolent and

stupid man, and that good people must not be hard on his pitiful plight and simplicity.
After begging for their kind protection Mr. Zimoveykin showed his livelier side, grew very
cheerful, kissed Ustinya Fyodorovna’s hands, in spite of her modest protests that her
hand was coarse and not like a lady’s; and towards evening promised to show the
company his talent in a remarkable character dance. But next day his visit ended in a
lamentable dénouement. Either because there had been too much character in the
character-dance, or because he had, in Ustinya Fyodorovna’s own words, somehow
“insulted her and treated her as no lady, though she was on friendly terms with Yaroslav
Ilyitch himself, and if she liked might long ago have been an officer’s wife,” Zimoveykin
had to steer for home next day. He went away, came back again, was again turned out
with ignominy, then wormed his way into Semyon Ivanovitch’s good graces, robbed him
incidentally of his new breeches, and now it appeared he had led Semyon Ivanovitch
astray.
As soon as the landlady knew that Semyon Ivanovitch was alive and well, and that
there was no need to hunt for his passport, she promptly left off grieving and was
pacified. Meanwhile some of the lodgers determined to give the runaway a triumphal
reception; they broke the bolt and moved away the screen from Mr. Prohartchin’s bed,
rumpled up the bed a little, took the famous box, put it at the foot of the bed; and on the
bed laid the sister-in-law, that is, a dummy made up of an old kerchief, a cap and a mantle
of the landlady’s, such an exact counterfeit of a sister-in-law that it might have been
mistaken for one. Having finished their work they waited for Semyon Ivanovitch to
return, meaning to tell him that his sister-in-law had arrived from the country and was
there behind his screen, poor thing! But they waited and waited.
Already, while they waited, Mark Ivanovitch had staked and lost half a month’s salary
to Prepolovenko and Kantarev; already Okeanov’s nose had grown red and swollen
playing “flips on the nose” and “three cards;” already Avdotya the servant had almost had
her sleep out and had twice been on the point of getting up to fetch the wood and light the
stove, and Zinovy Prokofyevitch, who kept running out every minute to see whether
Semyon Ivanovitch were coming, was wet to the skin; but there was no sign of any one
yet — neither Semyon Ivanovitch nor the drunken cadger. At last every one went to bed,
leaving the sister-in-law behind the screen in readiness for any emergency; and it was not
till four o’clock that a knock was heard at the gate, but when it did come it was so loud
that it quite made up to the expectant lodgers for all the wearisome trouble they had been
through. It was he — he himself — Semyon Ivanovitch, Mr. Prohartchin, but in such a

condition that they all cried out in dismay, and no one thought about the sister-in-law.
The lost man was unconscious. He was brought in, or more correctly carried in, by a
sopping and tattered night-cabman. To the landlady’s question where the poor dear man
had got so groggy, the cabman answered: “Why, he is not drunk and has not had a drop,
that I can tell you, for sure; but seemingly a faintness has come over him, or some sort of
a fit, or maybe he’s been knocked down by a blow.”
They began examining him, propping the culprit against the stove to do so more
conveniently, and saw that it really was not a case of drunkenness, nor had he had a blow,
but that something else was wrong, for Semyon Ivanovitch could not utter a word, but
seemed twitching in a sort of convulsion, and only blinked, fixing his eyes in
bewilderment first on one and then on another of the spectators, who were all attired in
night array. Then they began questioning the cabman, asking where he had got him from.
“Why, from folks out Kolomna way,” he answered. “Deuce knows what they are, not
exactly gentry, but merry, rollicking gentlemen; so he was like this when they gave him to
me; whether they had been fighting, or whether he was in some sort of a fit, goodness
knows what it was; but they were nice, jolly gentlemen!”
Semyon Ivanovitch was taken, lifted high on the shoulders of two or three sturdy
fellows, and carried to his bed. When Semyon Ivanovitch on being put in bed felt the
sister-in-law, and put his feet on his sacred box, he cried out at the top of his voice,
squatted up almost on his heels, and trembling and shaking all over, with his hands and
his body he cleared a space as far as he could in his bed, while gazing with a tremulous
but strangely resolute look at those present, he seemed as it were to protest that he would
sooner die than give up the hundredth part of his poor belongings to any one. . . .
Semyon Ivanovitch lay for two or three days closely barricaded by the screen, and so
cut off from all the world and all its vain anxieties. Next morning, of course, every one
had forgotten about him; time, meanwhile, flew by as usual, hour followed hour and day
followed day. The sick man’s heavy, feverish brain was plunged in something between
sleep and delirium; but he lay quietly and did not moan or complain; on the contrary he
kept still and silent and controlled himself, lying low in his bed, just as the hare lies close
to the earth when it hears the hunter. At times a long depressing stillness prevailed in the
flat, a sign that the lodgers had all gone to the office, and Semyon Ivanovitch, waking up,
could relieve his depression by listening to the bustle in the kitchen, where the landlady
was busy close by; or to the regular flop of Avdotya’s down-trodden slippers as, sighing
and moaning, she cleared away, rubbed and polished, tidying all the rooms in the flat.

Whole hours passed by in that way, drowsy, languid, sleepy, wearisome, like the water
that dripped with a regular sound from the locker into the basin in the kitchen. At last the
lodgers would arrive, one by one or in groups, and Semyon Ivanovitch could very
conveniently hear them abusing the weather, saying they were hungry, making a noise,
smoking, quarrelling, and making friends, playing cards, and clattering the cups as they
got ready for tea. Semyon Ivanovitch mechanically made an effort to get up and join
them, as he had a right to do at tea; but he at once sank back into drowsiness, and
dreamed that he had been sitting a long time at the tea-table, having tea with them and
talking, and that Zinovy Prokofyevitch had already seized the opportunity to introduce
into the conversation some scheme concerning sisters-in-law and the moral relation of
various worthy people to them. At this point Semyon Ivanovitch was in haste to defend
himself and reply. But the mighty formula that flew from every tongue —“It has more
than once been observed”— cut short all his objections, and Semyon Ivanovitch could do
nothing better than begin dreaming again that to-day was the first of the month and that
he was receiving money in his office.
Undoing the paper round it on the stairs, he looked about him quickly, and made
haste as fast as he could to subtract half of the lawful wages he had received and conceal
it in his boot. Then on the spot, on the stairs, quite regardless of the fact that he was in
bed and asleep, he made up his mind when he reached home to give his landlady what
was due for board and lodging; then to buy certain necessities, and to show any one it
might concern, as it were casually and unintentionally, that some of his salary had been
deducted, that now he had nothing left to send his sister-in-law; then to speak with
commiseration of his sister-in-law, to say a great deal about her the next day and the day
after, and ten days later to say something casually again about her poverty, that his
companions might not forget. Making this determination he observed that Andrey
Efimovitch, that everlastingly silent, bald little man who sat in the office three rooms
from where Semyon Ivanovitch sat, and hadn’t said a word to him for twenty years, was
standing on the stairs, that he, too, was counting his silver roubles, and shaking his head,
he said to him: “Money!” “If there’s no money there will be no porridge,” he added grimly
as he went down the stairs, and just at the door he ended: “And I have seven children, sir.”
Then the little bald man, probably equally unconscious that he was acting as a phantom
and not as a substantial reality, held up his hand about thirty inches from the floor, and
waving it vertically, muttered that the eldest was going to school, then glancing with
indignation at Semyon Ivanovitch, as though it were Mr. Prohartchin’s fault that he was

the father of seven, pulled his old hat down over his eyes, and with a whisk of his overcoat
he turned to the left and disappeared. Semyon Ivanovitch was quite frightened, and
though he was fully convinced of his own innocence in regard to the unpleasant
accumulation of seven under one roof, yet it seemed to appear that in fact no one else was
to blame but Semyon Ivanovitch. Panic-stricken he set off running, for it seemed to him
that the bald gentleman had turned back, was running after him, and meant to search him
and take away all his salary, insisting upon the indisputable number seven, and resolutely
denying any possible claim of any sort of sisters-in-law upon Semyon Ivanovitch.
Prohartchin ran and ran, gasping for breath. . . . Beside him was running, too, an immense
number of people, and all of them were jingling their money in the tailpockets of their
skimpy little dress-coats; at last every one ran up, there was the noise of fire engines, and
whole masses of people carried him almost on their shoulders up to that same house on
fire which he had watched last time in company with the drunken cadger. The drunken
cadger — alias Mr. Zimoveykin — was there now, too, he met Semyon Ivanovitch, made a
fearful fuss, took him by the arm, and led him into the thickest part of the crowd. Just as
then in reality, all about them was the noise and uproar of an immense crowd of people,
flooding the whole of Fontanka Embankment between the two bridges, as well as all the
surrounding streets and alleys; just as then, Semyon Ivanovitch, in company with the
drunken cadger, was carried along behind a fence, where they were squeezed as though in
pincers in a huge timber-yard full of spectators who had gathered from the street, from
Tolkutchy Market and from all the surrounding houses, taverns, and restaurants. Semyon
Ivanovitch saw all this and felt as he had done at the time; in the whirl of fever and
delirium all sorts of strange figures began flitting before him. He remembered some of
them. One of them was a gentleman who had impressed every one extremely, a man
seven feet high, with whiskers half a yard long, who had been standing behind Semyon
Ivanovitch’s back during the fire, and had given him encouragement from behind, when
our hero had felt something like ecstasy and had stamped as though intending thereby to
applaud the gallant work of the firemen, from which he had an excellent view from his
elevated position. Another was the sturdy lad from whom our hero had received a shove
by way of a lift on to another fence, when he had been disposed to climb over it, possibly
to save some one. He had a glimpse, too, of the figure of the old man with a sickly face, in
an old wadded dressing-gown, tied round the waist, who had made his appearance before
the fire in a little shop buying sugar and tobacco for his lodger, and who now, with a milkcan and a quart pot in his hands, made his way through the crowd to the house in which

his wife and daughter were burning together with thirteen and a half roubles in the
corner under the bed. But most distinct of all was the poor, sinful woman of whom he had
dreamed more than once during his illness — she stood before him now as she had done
then, in wretched bark shoes and rags, with a crutch and a wicker-basket on her back. She
was shouting more loudly than the firemen or the crowd, waving her crutch and her arms,
saying that her own children had turned her out and that she had lost two coppers in
consequence. The children and the coppers, the coppers and the children, were mingled
together in an utterly incomprehensible muddle, from which every one withdrew baffled,
after vain efforts to understand. But the woman would not desist, she kept wailing,
shouting, and waving her arms, seeming to pay no attention either to the fire up to which
she had been carried by the crowd from the street or to the people about her, or to the
misfortune of strangers, or even to the sparks and red-hot embers which were beginning
to fall in showers on the crowd standing near. At last Mr. Prohartchin felt that a feeling of
terror was coming upon him; for he saw clearly that all this was not, so to say, an
accident, and that he would not get off scot-free. And, indeed, upon the woodstack, close
to him, was a peasant, in a torn smock that hung loose about him, with his hair and beard
singed, and he began stirring up all the people against Semyon Ivanovitch. The crowd
pressed closer and closer, the peasant shouted, and foaming at the mouth with horror,
Mr. Prohartchin suddenly realized that this peasant was a cabman whom he had cheated
five years before in the most inhuman way, slipping away from him without paying
through a side gate and jerking up his heels as he ran as though he were barefoot on hot
bricks. In despair Mr. Prohartchin tried to speak, to scream, but his voice failed him. He
felt that the infuriated crowd was twining round him like a many-coloured snake,
strangling him, crushing him. He made an incredible effort and awoke. Then he saw that
he was on fire, that all his corner was on fire, that his screen was on fire, that the whole
flat was on fire, together with Ustinya Fyodorovna and all her lodgers, that his bed was
burning, his pillow, his quilt, his box, and last of all, his precious mattress. Semyon
Ivanovitch jumped up, clutched at the mattress and ran dragging it after him. But in the
landlady’s room into which, regardless of decorum, our hero ran just as he was, barefoot
and in his shirt, he was seized, held tight, and triumphantly carried back behind the
screen, which meanwhile was not on fire — it seemed that it was rather Semyon
Ivanovitch’s head that was on fire — and was put back to bed. It was just as some tattered,
unshaven, ill-humoured organ-grinder puts away in his travelling box the Punch who has
been making an upset, drubbing all the other puppets, selling his soul to the devil, and

who at last ends his existence, till the next performance, in the same box with the devil,
the negroes, the Pierrot, and Mademoiselle Katerina with her fortunate lover, the captain.
Immediately every one, old and young, surrounded Semyon Ivanovitch, standing in a
row round his bed and fastening eyes full of expectation on the invalid. Meantime he had
come to himself, but from shame or some other feeling, began pulling up the quilt over
him, apparently wishing to hide himself under it from the attention of his sympathetic
friends. At last Mark Ivanovitch was the first to break silence, and as a sensible man he
began saying in a very friendly way that Semyon Ivanovitch must keep calm, that it was
too bad and a shame to be ill, that only little children behaved like that, that he must get
well and go to the office. Mark Ivanovitch ended by a little joke, saying that no regular
salary had yet been fixed for invalids, and as he knew for a fact that their grade would be
very low in the service, to his thinking anyway, their calling or condition did not promise
great and substantial advantages. In fact, it was evident that they were all taking genuine
interest in Semyon Ivanovitch’s fate and were very sympathetic. But with
incomprehensible rudeness, Semyon Ivanovitch persisted in lying in bed in silence, and
obstinately pulling the quilt higher and higher over his head. Mark Ivanovitch, however,
would not be gainsaid, and restraining his feelings, said something very honeyed to
Semyon Ivanovitch again, knowing that that was how he ought to treat a sick man. But
Semyon Ivanovitch would not feel this: on the contrary he muttered something between
his teeth with the most distrustful air, and suddenly began glancing askance from right to
left in a hostile way, as though he would have reduced his sympathetic friends to ashes
with his eyes. It was no use letting it stop there. Mark Ivanovitch lost patience, and seeing
that the man was offended and completely exasperated, and had simply made up his mind
to be obstinate, told him straight out, without any softening suavity, that it was time to
get up, that it was no use lying there, that shouting day and night about houses on fire,
sisters-in-law, drunken cadgers, locks, boxes and goodness knows what, was all stupid,
improper, and degrading, for if Semyon Ivanovitch did not want to sleep himself he
should not hinder other people, and please would he bear it in mind.
This speech produced its effects, for Semyon Ivanovitch, turning promptly to the
orator, articulated firmly, though in a hoarse voice, “You hold your tongue, puppy! You
idle speaker, you foul-mouthed man! Do you hear, young dandy? Are you a prince, eh? Do
you understand what I say?”
Hearing such insults, Mark Ivanovitch fired up, but realizing that he had to deal with
a sick man, magnanimously overcame his resentment and tried to shame him out of his

humour, but was cut short in that too; for Semyon Ivanovitch observed at once that he
would not allow people to play with him for all that Mark Ivanovitch wrote poetry. Then
followed a silence of two minutes; at last recovering from his amazement Mark
Ivanovitch, plainly, clearly, in well-chosen language, but with firmness, declared that
Semyon Ivanovitch ought to understand that he was among gentlemen, and “you ought to
understand, sir, how to behave with gentlemen.”
Mark Ivanovitch could on occasion speak effectively and liked to impress his hearers,
but, probably from the habit of years of silence, Semyon Ivanovitch talked and acted
somewhat abruptly; and, moreover, when he did on occasion begin a long sentence, as he
got further into it every word seemed to lead to another word, that other word to a third
word, that third to a fourth and so on, so that his mouth seemed brimming over; he began
stuttering, and the crowding words took to flying out in picturesque disorder. That was
why Semyon Ivanovitch, who was a sensible man, sometimes talked terrible nonsense.
“You are lying,” he said now. “You booby, you loose fellow! You’ll come to want — you’ll
go begging, you seditious fellow, you — you loafer. Take that, you poet!”
“Why, you are still raving, aren’t you, Semyon Ivanovitch?”
“I tell you what,” answered Semyon Ivanovitch, “fools rave, drunkards rave, dogs
rave, but a wise man acts sensibly. I tell you, you don’t know your own business, you
loafer, you educated gentleman, you learned book! Here, you’ll get on fire and not notice
your head’s burning off. What do you think of that?”
“Why . . . you mean. . . . How do you mean, burn my head off, Semyon Ivanovitch?”
Mark Ivanovitch said no more, for every one saw clearly that Semyon Ivanovitch was
not yet in his sober senses, but delirious.
But the landlady could not resist remarking at this point that the house in Crooked
Lane had been burnt owing to a bald wench; that there was a bald-headed wench living
there, that she had lighted a candle and set fire to the lumber room; but nothing would
happen in her place, and everything would be all right in the flats.
“But look here, Semyon Ivanovitch,” cried Zinovy Prokofyevitch, losing patience and
interrupting the landlady, “you old fogey, you old crock, you silly fellow — are they
making jokes with you now about your sister-in-law or examinations in dancing? Is that
it? Is that what you think?”
“Now, I tell you what,” answered our hero, sitting up in bed and making a last effort
in a paroxysm of fury with his sympathetic friends. “Who’s the fool? You are the fool, a

dog is a fool, you joking gentleman. But I am not going to make jokes to please you, sir;
do you hear, puppy? I am not your servant, sir.”
Semyon Ivanovitch would have said something more, but he fell back in bed helpless.
His sympathetic friends were left gaping in perplexity, for they understood now what was
wrong with Semyon Ivanovitch and did not know how to begin. Suddenly the kitchen door
creaked and opened, and the drunken cadger — alias Mr. Zimoveykin — timidly thrust in
his head, cautiously sniffing round the place as his habit was. It seemed as though he had
been expected, every one waved to him at once to come quickly, and Zimoveykin, highly
delighted, with the utmost readiness and haste jostled his way to Semyon Ivanovitch’s
bedside.
It was evident that Zimoveykin had spent the whole night in vigil and in great
exertions of some sort. The right side of his face was plastered up; his swollen eyelids
were wet from his running eyes, his coat and all his clothes were torn, while the whole
left side of his attire was bespattered with something extremely nasty, possibly mud from
a puddle. Under his arm was somebody’s violin, which he had been taking somewhere to
sell. Apparently they had not made a mistake in summoning him to their assistance, for
seeing the position of affairs, he addressed the delinquent at once, and with the air of a
man who knows what he is about and feels that he has the upper hand, said: “What are
you thinking about? Get up, Senka. What are you doing, a clever chap like you? Be
sensible, or I shall pull you out of bed if you are obstreperous. Don’t be obstreperous!”
This brief but forcible speech surprised them all; still more were they surprised when
they noticed that Semyon Ivanovitch, hearing all this and seeing this person before him,
was so flustered and reduced to such confusion and dismay that he could scarcely mutter
through his teeth in a whisper the inevitable protest.
“Go away, you wretch,” he said. “You are a wretched creature — you are a thief! Do
you hear? Do you understand? You are a great swell, my fine gentleman, you regular
swell.”
“No, my boy,” Zimoveykin answered emphatically, retaining all his presence of mind,
“you’re wrong there, you wise fellow, you regular Prohartchin,” Zimoveykin went on,
parodying Semyon Ivanovitch and looking round gleefully. “Don’t be obstreperous!
Behave yourself, Senka, behave yourself, or I’ll give you away, I’ll tell them all about it,
my lad, do you understand?”
Apparently Semyon Ivanovitch did understand, for he started when he heard the
conclusion of the speech, and began looking rapidly about him with an utterly desperate

air.
Satisfied with the effect, Mr. Zimoveykin would have continued, but Mark Ivanovitch
checked his zeal, and waiting till Semyon Ivanovitch was still and almost calm again
began judiciously impressing on the uneasy invalid at great length that, “to harbour ideas
such as he now had in his head was, first, useless, and secondly, not only useless, but
harmful; and, in fact, not so much harmful as positively immoral; and the cause of it all
was that Semyon Ivanovitch was not only a bad example, but led them all into
temptation.”
Every one expected satisfactory results from this speech. Moreover by now Semyon
Ivanovitch was quite quiet and replied in measured terms. A quiet discussion followed.
They appealed to him in a friendly way, inquiring what he was so frightened of. Semyon
Ivanovitch answered, but his answers were irrelevant. They answered him, he answered
them. There were one or two more observations on both sides and then every one rushed
into discussion, for suddenly such a strange and amazing subject cropped up, that they
did not know how to express themselves. The argument at last led to impatience,
impatience led to shouting, and shouting even to tears; and Mark Ivanovitch went away at
last foaming at the mouth and declaring that he had never known such a blockhead.
Oplevaniev spat in disgust, Okeanov was frightened, Zinovy Prokofyevitch became tearful,
while Ustinya Fyodorovna positively howled, wailing that her lodger was leaving them
and had gone off his head, that he would die, poor dear man, without a passport and
without telling any one, while she was a lone, lorn woman and that she would be dragged
from pillar to post. In fact, they all saw clearly at last that the seed they had sown had
yielded a hundred-fold, that the soil had been too productive, and that in their company,
Semyon Ivanovitch had succeeded in overstraining his wits completely and in the most
irrevocable manner. Every one subsided into silence, for though they saw that Semyon
Ivanovitch was frightened, the sympathetic friends were frightened too.
“What?” cried Mark Ivanovitch; “but what are you afraid of? What have you gone off
your head about? Who’s thinking about you, my good sir? Have you the right to be afraid?
Who are you? What are you? Nothing, sir. A round nought, sir, that is what you are. What
are you making a fuss about? A woman has been run over in the street, so are you going
to be run over? Some drunkard did not take care of his pocket, but is that any reason why
your coat-tails should be cut off? A house is burnt down, so your head is to be burnt off, is
it? Is that it, sir, is that it?”
“You . . . you . . . you stupid!” muttered Semyon Ivanovitch, “if your nose were cut off

you would eat it up with a bit of bread and not notice it.”
“I may be a dandy,” shouted Mark Ivanovitch, not listening; “I may be a regular
dandy, but I have not to pass an examination to get married — to learn dancing; the
ground is firm under me, sir. Why, my good man, haven’t you room enough? Is the floor
giving way under your feet, or what?”
“Well, they won’t ask you, will they? They’ll shut one up and that will be the end of
it?”
“The end of it? That’s what’s up? What’s your idea now, eh?”
“Why, they kicked out the drunken cadger.”
“Yes; but you see that was a drunkard, and you are a man, and so am I.”
“Yes, I am a man. It’s there all right one day and then it’s gone.”
“Gone! But what do you mean by it?”
“Why, the office! The off — off — ice!”
“Yes, you blessed man, but of course the office is wanted and necessary.”
“It is wanted, I tell you; it’s wanted to-day and it’s wanted to-morrow, but the day
after to-morrow it will not be wanted. You have heard what happened?”
“Why, but they’ll pay you your salary for the year, you doubting Thomas, you man of
little faith. They’ll put you into another job on account of your age.”
“Salary? But what if I have spent my salary, if thieves come and take my money? And
I have a sister-in-law, do you hear? A sister-in-law! You battering-ram. . . . ”
“A sister-in-law! You are a man. . . . ”
“Yes, I am; I am a man. But you are a well-read gentleman and a fool, do you hear? —
you battering-ram — you regular battering-ram! That’s what you are! I am not talking
about your jokes; but there are jobs such that all of a sudden they are done away with.
And Demid — do you hear? — Demid Vassilyevitch says that the post will be done away
with. . . . ”
“Ah, bless you, with your Demid! You sinner, why, you know. . . . ”
“In a twinkling of an eye you’ll be left without a post, then you’ll just have to make
the best of it.”
“Why, you are simply raving, or clean off your head! Tell us plainly, what have you
done? Own up if you have done something wrong! It’s no use being ashamed! Are you off
your head, my good man, eh?”

“He’s off his head! He’s gone off his head!” they all cried, and wrung their hands in
despair, while the landlady threw both her arms round Mark Ivanovitch for fear he should
tear Semyon Ivanovitch to pieces.
“You heathen, you heathenish soul, you wise man!” Zimoveykin besought him.
“Senka, you are not a man to take offence, you are a polite, prepossessing man. You are
simple, you are good . . . do you hear? It all comes from your goodness. Here I am a
ruffian and a fool, I am a beggar; but good people haven’t abandoned me, no fear; you see
they treat me with respect, I thank them and the landlady. Here, you see, I bow down to
the ground to them; here, see, see, I am paying what is due to you, landlady!” At this point
Zimoveykin swung off with pedantic dignity a low bow right down to the ground.
After that Semyon Ivanovitch would have gone on talking; but this time they would
not let him, they all intervened, began entreating him, assuring him, comforting him, and
succeeded in making Semyon Ivanovitch thoroughly ashamed of himself, and at last, in a
faint voice, he asked leave to explain himself.
“Very well, then,” he said, “I am prepossessing, I am quiet, I am good, faithful and
devoted; to the last drop of my blood you know . . . do you hear, you puppy, you swell? . . .
granted the job is going on, but you see I am poor. And what if they take it? do you hear,
you swell? Hold your tongue and try to understand! They’ll take it and that’s all about it
. . . it’s going on, brother, and then not going on . . . do you understand? And I shall go
begging my bread, do you hear?”
“Senka,” Zimoveykin bawled frantically, drowning the general hubbub with his voice.
“You are seditious! I’ll inform against you! What are you saying? Who are you? Are you a
rebel, you sheep’s head? A rowdy, stupid man they would turn off without a character.
But what are you?”
“Well, that’s just it.”
“What?”
“Well, there it is.”
“How do you mean?”
“Why, I am free, he’s free, and here one lies and thinks. . . . ”
“What?”
“What if they say I’m seditious?”
“Se — di — tious? Senka, you seditious!”
“Stay,” cried Mr. Prohartchin, waving his hand and interrupting the rising uproar,

“that’s not what I mean. Try to understand, only try to understand, you sheep. I am lawabiding. I am law-abiding to-day, I am law-abiding to-morrow, and then all of a sudden
they kick me out and call me seditious.”
“What are you saying?” Mark Ivanovitch thundered at last, jumping up from the
chair on which he had sat down to rest, running up to the bed and in a frenzy shaking
with vexation and fury. “What do you mean? You sheep! You’ve nothing to call your own.
Why, are you the only person in the world? Was the world made for you, do you suppose?
Are you a Napoleon? What are you? Who are you? Are you a Napoleon, eh? Tell me, are
you a Napoleon?”
But Mr. Prohartchin did not answer this question. Not because he was overcome with
shame at being a Napoleon, and was afraid of taking upon himself such a responsibility —
no, he was incapable of disputing further, or saying anything. . . . His illness had reached a
crisis. Tiny teardrops gushed suddenly from his glittering, feverish, grey eyes. He hid his
burning head in his bony hands that were wasted by illness, sat up in bed, and sobbing,
began to say that he was quite poor, that he was a simple, unlucky man, that he was
foolish and unlearned, he begged kind folks to forgive him, to take care of him, to protect
him, to give him food and drink, not to leave him in want, and goodness knows what else
Semyon Ivanovitch said. As he uttered this appeal he looked about him in wild terror, as
though he were expecting the ceiling to fall or the floor to give way. Every one felt his
heart soften and move to pity as he looked at the poor fellow. The landlady, sobbing and
wailing like a peasant woman at her forlorn condition, laid the invalid back in bed with
her own hands. Mark Ivanovitch, seeing the uselessness of touching upon the memory of
Napoleon, instantly relapsed into kindliness and came to her assistance. The others, in
order to do something, suggested raspberry tea, saying that it always did good at once and
that the invalid would like it very much; but Zimoveykin contradicted them all, saying
there was nothing better than a good dose of camomile or something of the sort. As for
Zinovy Prokofyevitch, having a good heart, he sobbed and shed tears in his remorse, for
having frightened Semyon Ivanovitch with all sorts of absurdities, and gathering from the
invalid’s last words that he was quite poor and needing assistance, he proceeded to get up
a subscription for him, confining it for a time to the tenants of the flat. Every one was
sighing and moaning, every one felt sorry and grieved, and yet all wondered how it was a
man could be so completely panic-stricken. And what was he frightened about? It would
have been all very well if he had had a good post, had had a wife, a lot of children; it would
have been excusable if he were being hauled up before the court on some charge or other;

but he was a man utterly insignificant, with nothing but a trunk and a German lock; he
had been lying more than twenty years behind his screen, saying nothing, knowing
nothing of the world nor of trouble, saving his half-pence, and now at a frivolous, idle
word the man had actually gone off his head, was utterly panic-stricken at the thought he
might have a hard time of it. . . . And it never occurred to him that every one has a hard
time of it! “If he would only take that into consideration,” Okeanov said afterwards, “that
we all have a hard time, then the man would have kept his head, would have given up his
antics and would have put up with things, one way or another.”
All day long nothing was talked of but Semyon Ivanovitch. They went up to him,
inquired after him, tried to comfort him; but by the evening he was beyond that. The poor
fellow began to be delirious, feverish. He sank into unconsciousness, so that they almost
thought of sending for a doctor; the lodgers all agreed together and undertook to watch
over Semyon Ivanovitch and soothe him by turns through the night, and if anything
happened to wake all the rest immediately. With the object of keeping awake, they sat
down to cards, setting beside the invalid his friend, the drunken cadger, who had spent
the whole day in the flat and had asked leave to stay the night. As the game was played on
credit and was not at all interesting they soon got bored. They gave up the game, then got
into an argument about something, then began to be loud and noisy, finally dispersed to
their various corners, went on for a long time angrily shouting and wrangling, and as all
of them felt suddenly ill-humoured they no longer cared to sit up, so went to sleep. Soon
it was as still in the flat as in an empty cellar, and it was the more like one because it was
horribly cold. The last to fall asleep was Okeanov. “And it was between sleeping and
waking,” as he said afterwards, “I fancied just before morning two men kept talking close
by me.” Okeanov said that he recognized Zimoveykin, and that Zimoveykin began waking
his old friend Remnev just beside him, that they talked for a long time in a whisper; then
Zimoveykin went away and could be heard trying to unlock the door into the kitchen. The
key, the landlady declared afterwards, was lying under her pillow and was lost that night.
Finally — Okeanov testified — he had fancied he had heard them go behind the screen to
the invalid and light a candle there, “and I know nothing more,” he said, “I fell asleep, and
woke up,” as everybody else did, when every one in the flat jumped out of bed at the
sound behind the screen of a shriek that would have roused the dead, and it seemed to
many of them that a candle went out at that moment. A great hubbub arose, every one’s
heart stood still; they rushed pell-mell at the shriek, but at that moment there was a
scuffle, with shouting, swearing, and fighting. They struck a light and saw that

Zimoveykin and Remnev were fighting together, that they were swearing and abusing one
another, and as they turned the light on them, one of them shouted: “It’s not me, it’s this
ruffian,” and the other who was Zimoveykin, was shouting: “Don’t touch me, I’ve done
nothing! I’ll take my oath any minute!” Both of them looked hardly like human beings;
but for the first minute they had no attention to spare for them; the invalid was not where
he had been behind the screen. They immediately parted the combatants and dragged
them away, and saw that Mr. Prohartchin was lying under the bed; he must, while
completely unconscious, have dragged the quilt and pillow after him so that there was
nothing left on the bedstead but the bare mattress, old and greasy (he never had sheets).
They pulled Semyon Ivanovitch out, stretched him on the mattress, but soon realized that
there was no need to make trouble over him, that he was completely done for; his arms
were stiff, and he seemed all to pieces. They stood over him, he still faintly shuddered and
trembled all over, made an effort to do something with his arms, could not utter a word,
but blinked his eyes as they say heads do when still warm and bleeding, after being just
chopped off by the executioner.
At last the body grew more and more still; the last faint convulsions died away. Mr.
Prohartchin had set off with his good deeds and his sins. Whether Semyon Ivanovitch had
been frightened by something, whether he had had a dream, as Remnev maintained
afterwards, or there had been some other mischief — nobody knew; all that can be said is,
that if the head clerk had made his appearance at that moment in the flat and had
announced that Semyon Ivanovitch was dismissed for sedition, insubordination, and
drunkenness; if some old draggle-tailed beggar woman had come in at the door, calling
herself Semyon Ivanovitch’s sister-in-law; or if Semyon Ivanovitch had just received two
hundred roubles as a reward; or if the house had caught fire and Semyon Ivanovitch’s
head had been really burning — he would in all probability not have deigned to stir a
finger in any of these eventualities. While the first stupefaction was passing over, while
all present were regaining their powers of speech, were working themselves up into a
fever of excitement, shouting and flying to conjectures and suppositions; while Ustinya
Fyodorovna was pulling the box from under his bed, was rummaging in a fluster under
the mattress and even in Semyon Ivanovitch’s boots; while they cross-questioned
Remnev and Zimoveykin, Okeanov, who had hitherto been the quietest, humblest, and
least original of the lodgers, suddenly plucked up all his presence of mind and displayed
all his latent talents, by taking up his hat and under cover of the general uproar slipping
out of the flat. And just when the horrors of disorder and anarchy had reached their

height in the agitated flat, till then so tranquil, the door opened and suddenly there
descended upon them, like snow upon their heads, a personage of gentlemanly
appearance, with a severe and displeased-looking face, behind him Yaroslav Ilyitch,
behind Yaroslav Ilyitch his subordinates and the functionaries whose duty it is to be
present on such occasions, and behind them all, much embarrassed, Mr. Okeanov. The
severe-looking personage of gentlemanly appearance went straight up to Semyon
Ivanovitch, examined him, made a wry face, shrugged his shoulders and announced what
everybody knew, that is, that the dead man was dead, only adding that the same thing had
happened a day or two ago to a gentleman of consequence, highly respected, who had died
suddenly in his sleep. Then the personage of gentlemanly, but displeased-looking,
appearance walked away saying that they had troubled him for nothing, and took himself
off. His place was at once filled (while Remnev and Zimoveykin were handed over to the
custody of the proper functionaries), by Yaroslav Ilyitch, who questioned some one,
adroitly took possession of the box, which the landlady was already trying to open, put the
boots back in their proper place, observing that they were all in holes and no use, asked
for the pillow to be put back, called up Okeanov, asked for the key of the box which was
found in the pocket of the drunken cadger, and solemnly, in the presence of the proper
officials, unlocked Semyon Ivanovitch’s property. Everything was displayed: two rags, a
pair of socks, half a handkerchief, an old hat, several buttons, some old soles, and the
uppers of a pair of boots, that is, all sorts of odds and ends, scraps, rubbish, trash, which
had a stale smell. The only thing of any value was the German lock. They called up
Okeanov and cross-questioned him sternly; but Okeanov was ready to take his oath. They
asked for the pillow, they examined it; it was extremely dirty, but in other respects it was
like all other pillows. They attacked the mattress, they were about to lift it up, but stopped
for a moment’s consideration, when suddenly and quite unexpectedly something heavy
fell with a clink on the floor. They bent down and saw on the floor a screw of paper and in
the screw some dozen roubles. “A-hey!” said Yaroslav Ilyitch, pointing to a slit in the
mattress from which hair and stuffing were sticking out. They examined the slit and
found that it had only just been made with a knife and was half a yard in length; they
thrust hands into the gap and pulled out a kitchen knife, probably hurriedly thrust in
there after slitting the mattress. Before Yaroslav Ilyitch had time to pull the knife out of
the slit and to say “A-hey!” again, another screw of money fell out, and after it, one at a
time, two half roubles, a quarter rouble, then some small change, and an old-fashioned,
solid five-kopeck piece — all this was seized upon. At this point it was realized that it

would not be amiss to cut up the whole mattress with scissors. They asked for scissors.
Meanwhile, the guttering candle lighted up a scene that would have been extremely
curious to a spectator. About a dozen lodgers were grouped round the bed in the most
picturesque costumes, all unbrushed, unshaven, unwashed, sleepy-looking, just as they
had gone to bed. Some were quite pale, while others had drops of sweat upon their brows:
some were shuddering, while others looked feverish. The landlady, utterly stupefied, was
standing quietly with her hands folded waiting for Yaroslav Ilyitch’s good pleasure. From
the stove above, the heads of Avdotya, the servant, and the landlady’s favourite cat looked
down with frightened curiosity. The torn and broken screen lay cast on the floor, the open
box displayed its uninviting contents, the quilt and pillow lay tossed at random, covered
with fluff from the mattress, and on the three-legged wooden table gleamed the steadily
growing heap of silver and other coins. Only Semyon Ivanovitch preserved his composure,
lying calmly on the bed and seeming to have no foreboding of his ruin. When the scissors
had been brought and Yaroslav Ilyitch’s assistant, wishing to be of service, shook the
mattress rather impatiently to ease it from under the back of its owner, Semyon
Ivanovitch with his habitual civility made room a little, rolling on his side with his back to
the searchers; then at a second shake he turned on his face, finally gave way still further,
and as the last slat in the bedstead was missing, he suddenly and quite unexpectedly
plunged head downward, leaving in view only two bony, thin, blue legs, which stuck
upwards like two branches of a charred tree. As this was the second time that morning
that Mr. Prohartchin had poked his head under his bed it at once aroused suspicion, and
some of the lodgers, headed by Zinovy Prokofyevitch, crept under it, with the intention of
seeing whether there were something hidden there too. But they knocked their heads
together for nothing, and as Yaroslav Ilyitch shouted to them, bidding them release
Semyon Ivanovitch at once from his unpleasant position, two of the more sensible seized
each a leg, dragged the unsuspected capitalist into the light of day and laid him across the
bed. Meanwhile the hair and flock were flying about, the heap of silver grew — and, my
goodness, what a lot there was! . . . Noble silver roubles, stout solid rouble and a half
pieces, pretty half rouble coins, plebeian quarter roubles, twenty kopeck pieces, even the
unpromising old crone’s small fry of ten and five kopeck silver pieces — all done up in
separate bits of paper in the most methodical and systematic way; there were curiosities
also, two counters of some sort, one napoléon d’or, one very rare coin of some unknown
kind. . . . Some of the roubles were of the greatest antiquity, they were rubbed and hacked
coins of Elizabeth, German kreutzers, coins of Peter, of Catherine; there were, for

instance, old fifteen-kopeck pieces, now very rare, pierced for wearing as earrings, all
much worn, yet with the requisite number of dots . . . there was even copper, but all of
that was green and tarnished. . . . They found one red note, but no more. At last, when the
dissection was quite over and the mattress case had been shaken more than once without
a clink, they piled all the money on the table and set to work to count it. At the first glance
one might well have been deceived and have estimated it at a million, it was such an
immense heap. But it was not a million, though it did turn out to be a very considerable
sum — exactly 2497 roubles and a half — so that if Zinovy Prokofyevitch’s subscription
had been raised the day before there would perhaps have been just 2500 roubles. They
took the money, they put a seal on the dead man’s box, they listened to the landlady’s
complaints, and informed her when and where she ought to lodge information in regard
to the dead man’s little debt to her. A receipt was taken from the proper person. At that
point hints were dropped in regard to the sister-in-law; but being persuaded that in a
certain sense the sister-in-law was a myth, that is, a product of the defective imagination
with which they had more than once reproached Semyon Ivanovitch — they abandoned
the idea as useless, mischievous and disadvantageous to the good name of Mr.
Prohartchin, and so the matter ended.
When the first shock was over, when the lodgers had recovered themselves and
realized the sort of person their late companion had been, they all subsided, relapsed into
silence and began looking distrustfully at one another. Some seemed to take Semyon
Ivanovitch’s behaviour very much to heart, and even to feel affronted by it. What a
fortune! So the man had saved up like this! Not losing his composure, Mark Ivanovitch
proceeded to explain why Semyon Ivanovitch had been so suddenly panic-stricken; but
they did not listen to him. Zinovy Prokofyevitch was very thoughtful, Okeanov had had a
little to drink, the others seemed rather crestfallen, while a little man called Kantarev,
with a nose like a sparrow’s beak, left the flat that evening after very carefully packing up
and cording all his boxes and bags, and coldly explaining to the curious that times were
hard and that the terms here were beyond his means. The landlady wailed without
ceasing, lamenting for Semyon Ivanovitch, and cursing him for having taken advantage of
her lone, lorn state. Mark Ivanovitch was asked why the dead man had not taken his
money to the bank. “He was too simple, my good soul, he hadn’t enough imagination,”
answered Mark Ivanovitch.
“Yes, and you have been too simple, too, my good woman,” Okeanov put in. “For
twenty years the man kept himself close here in your flat, and here he’s been knocked

down by a feather — while you went on cooking cabbage-soup and had no time to notice
it. . . . Ah-ah, my good woman!”
“Oh, the poor dear,” the landlady went on, “what need of a bank! If he’d brought me
his pile and said to me: ‘Take it, Ustinyushka, poor dear, here is all I have, keep and board
me in my helplessness, so long as I am on earth,’ then, by the holy ikon I would have fed
him, I would have given him drink, I would have looked after him. Ah, the sinner! ah, the
deceiver! He deceived me, he cheated me, a poor lone woman!”
They went up to the bed again. Semyon Ivanovitch was lying properly now, dressed in
his best, though, indeed, it was his only suit, hiding his rigid chin behind a cravat which
was tied rather awkwardly, washed, brushed, but not quite shaven, because there was no
razor in the flat; the only one, which had belonged to Zinovy Prokofyevitch, had lost its
edge a year ago and had been very profitably sold at Tolkutchy Market; the others used to
go to the barber’s.
They had not yet had time to clear up the disorder. The broken screen lay as before,
and exposing Semyon Ivanovitch’s seclusion, seemed like an emblem of the fact that
death tears away the veil from all our secrets, our shifty dodges and intrigues. The
stuffing from the mattress lay about in heaps. The whole room, suddenly so still, might
well have been compared by a poet to the ruined nest of a swallow, broken down and torn
to pieces by the storm, the nestlings and their mother killed, and their warm little bed of
fluff, feather and flock scattered about them. . . . Semyon Ivanovitch, however, looked
more like a conceited, thievish old cock-sparrow. He kept quite quiet now, seemed to be
lying low, as though he were not guilty, as though he had had nothing to do with the
shameless, conscienceless, and unseemly duping and deception of all these good people.
He did not heed now the sobs and wailing of his bereaved and wounded landlady. On the
contrary, like a wary, callous capitalist, anxious not to waste a minute in idleness even in
the coffin, he seemed to be wrapped up in some speculative calculation. There was a look
of deep reflection in his face, while his lips were drawn together with a significant air, of
which Semyon Ivanovitch during his lifetime had not been suspected of being capable. He
seemed, as it were, to have grown shrewder, his right eye was, as it were, slyly screwed up.
Semyon Ivanovitch seemed wanting to say something, to make some very important
communication and explanation and without loss of time, because things were
complicated and there was not a minute to lose. . . . And it seemed as though they could
hear him.
“What is it? Give over, do you hear, you stupid woman? Don’t whine! Go to bed and

sleep it off, my good woman, do you hear? I am dead; there’s no need of a fuss now.
What’s the use of it, really? It’s nice to lie here. . . . Though I don’t mean that, do you
hear? You are a fine lady, you are a regular fine lady. Understand that; here I am dead
now, but look here, what if — that is, perhaps it can’t be so — but I say what if I’m not
dead, what if I get up, do you hear? What would happen then?”
