I
I am a ridiculous man. They call me mad now. That would be a step up in rank,
if I did not still remain as ridiculous to them as before. But now I’m no longer
angry, now they are all dear to me, and even when they laugh at me - then, too,
they are even somehow especially dear to me. I would laugh with them - not really
at myself, but for love of them - if it weren’t so sad for me to look at them. Sad
because they don’t know the truth, and I do know the truth. Ah, how hard it is to
be the only one who knows the truth! But they won’t understand that. No, they
won’t understand it.
Before, it caused me great anguish that I seemed ridiculous. Not seemed, but
was. I was always ridiculous, and I know it, maybe right from birth. Maybe from
the age of seven I already knew I was ridiculous. Then I went to school, then to the
university, and what - the more I studied, the more I learned that I was ridiculous.
So that for me, all my university education existed ultimately as if only to prove and
explain to me, the deeper I went into it, that I was ridiculous. And as with learning,
so with life. Every passing year the same consciousness grew and strengthened in
me that my appearance was in all respects ridiculous. I was ridiculed by everyone
and always. But none of them knew or suspected that if there was one man on
earth who was more aware than anyone else of my ridiculousness, it was I myself,
and this was the most vexing thing for me, that they didn’t know it, but here I
myself was to blame: I was always so proud that I would never confess it to anyone
for anything. This pride grew in me over the years, and if it had so happened
that I allowed myself to confess to anyone at all that I was ridiculous, I think that
same evening I’d have blown my head off with a revolver. Oh, how I suffered in
my youth over being unable to help myself and suddenly somehow confessing it to
my comrades. But once I reached early manhood, I became a bit calmer for some
reason, though with ever passing year I learned more and more about my terrible
quality. Precisely for some reason, because to this day I cannot determine why.
Maybe because a dreadful anguish was growing in my soul over one circumstance
which was infinitely higher than the whole of me: namely - the conviction was
overtaking me that everywhere in the world it made no difference. I had had a
presentiment of this for a very long time, but the full conviction came during the
last year somehow suddenly. I suddenly felt that it would make no difference to me
whether the world existed or there was nothing anywhere. I began to feel and know
with my whole being that with me there was nothing. At first I kept thinking that
instead there had been a lot before, but then I realized that there had been nothing
before either, it only seemed so for some reason. Little by little I became convinced
that there would never be anything. Then I suddenly stopped being angry with
people and began almost not to notice them. Indeed, this was manifest even in the

smallest trifles: it would happen, for instance, that I’d walk down the street and
bump into people. It wasn’t really because I was lost in thought: what could I have
been thinking about, I had completely ceased to think then: it made no difference
to me. And it would have been fine if I had resolved questions - oh, I never resolved
a single one, and there were so many! But it began to make no difference to me,
and the questions all went away.
And then, after that, I learned the truth. I learned the truth last November,
precisely on the third of November, and since that time I remember my every
moment. It was a gloomy evening, as gloomy as could be. I was returning home
then, between ten and eleven o’clock, and I remember I precisely thought that there
could not be a gloomier time. Even in the physical respect. Rain had poured down
all day, and it was the coldest and gloomiest rain, even some sort of menacing rain,
I remember that, with an obvious hostility to people, and now, between ten and
eleven, it suddenly stopped, and a terrible dampness set in, damper and colder than
when it was raining, and a sort of steam rose from everything, from every stone in
the street and from every alleyway, if you looked far into its depths from the street.
I suddenly imagined that if the gaslights went out everywhere, it would be more
cheerful, and that with the gaslights it was sadder for the heart, because they threw
light on it all. I’d had almost no dinner that day, and had spent since early evening
sitting at some engineer’s, with two more friends siting there as well. I kept silent,
and they seemed to be sick of me. They talked about something provocative and
suddenly even grew excited. But it made no difference to them, I could see that,
and they got excited just so. I suddenly told them that: “Gentlemen,” I said, “it
makes no difference to you.” They weren’t offended, but they all started laughing
at me. It was because I said it without any reproach and simply because it made no
difference to me. And they could see that it made no difference to me, and found
that amusing.
When I thought in the street about the gaslights, I looked up at the sky. The
sky was terribly dark, but one could clearly make out the torn clouds and the
bottomless black spots between them. Suddenly in one of these spots I noticed a
little star and began gazing at it intently. Because this little star gave me an idea:
I resolved to kill myself that night. I had firmly resolved on it two months earlier,
and, poor as I was, had bought an excellent revolver and loaded it that same day.
But two months had passed and it was still lying in the drawer; but it made so
little difference to me that I wished finally to seize a moment when it was less so
- why, I didn’t know. And thus, during those two months, returning home each
night, I thought I was going to shoot myself. I kept waiting for the moment. And
so now this little star gave me the idea, and I resolved that it would be that night
without fail. And why the star gave me the idea - I don’t know.
And so, as I was looking at the sky, this girl suddenly seized me by the elbow.
The street was empty, and almost no one was about. Far off a coachman was
sleeping in his droshky. The girl was about eight years old, in a kerchief and just a
little dress, all wet, but I especially remembered her wet, torn shoes, and remember
them now. They especially flashed before my eyes. She suddenly started pulling me
by the elbow and calling out. She didn’t cry, but somehow abruptly shouted some
words, which she was unable to pronounce properly because she was chilled and
shivering all over. She was terrified by something and shouted desperately: “Mama!
Mama!” I turned my face to her, but did not say a word and went on walking, but

she was running and pulling at me, and in her voice there was the sound which in
very frightened children indicates despair. I know that sound. Though she did not
speak all the words out, I understood that her mother was dying somewhere, or
something had happened with them there, and she had run out to call someone,
to find something so as to help her mother. But I did not go with her and, on the
contrary suddenly had the idea of chasing her away. First I told her to go and find
a policeman. But she suddenly pressed her hands together and, sobbing, choking,
kept running beside me and wouldn’t leave me. It was then that I stamped my
feet at her and shouted. She only cried out: “Mister! Mister!. . . ” but suddenly
she dropped me and ran headlong across the street: some other passerby appeared
there, and she apparently rushed from me to him.
I went up to my fifth floor. I live in a rented room, a furnished one. It’s a
poor and small room, with a half-round garret window. I have an oilcloth sofa,
and a table with books on it, two chairs, and an armchair, as old as can be, but
a Voltaire one. I sat down, lighted a candle, and began to think. Next door, in
another room, behind a partition, there was a bedlam. It had been going on for two
days. A retired captain lived there, and he had guests - some six scurvy fellows,
drinking vodka and playing blackjack with used cards. The previous night they’d
had a fight, and I know that two of them had pulled each other’s hair for a long
time. The landlady wanted to lodge a complaint, but she’s terribly afraid of the
captain. The only other tenants in our furnished rooms are a small, thin lady, an
army wife and out-of-towner, with three small children who had already fallen ill in
our rooms. She and her children are afraid of the captain to the point of fainting,
and spend whole nights trembling and crossing themselves, and the smallest child
had some sort of fit from fear. This captain, I know for certain, sometimes stops
passersby on Nevsky Prospect and begs money from them. They won’t take him
into any kind of service, yet, strangely (this is what I’ve been driving at), in the
whole month that he had been living with us, the captain had never aroused any
vexation in me. Of course, I avoided making his acquaintance from the very start,
and he himself got bored with me from the first, yet no matter how they shouted
behind their partition, and however many they were - it never made any difference
to me. I sit the whole night and don’t really hear them - so far do I forget about
them. I don’t sleep at night until dawn, and that for a year now. I sit all night
at the table in the armchair and do nothing. I read books only during the day. I
sit and don’t even think, just so, some thoughts wander about and I let them go.
A whole candle burns down overnight. I quietly sat down at the table, took out
the revolver, and placed it in front of me. As I placed it there, I remember asking
myself: “Is it so?” and answering myself quite affirmatively: “It is.” Meaning I
would shoot myself. I knew that I would shoot myself that night for certain, but
how long I would stay sitting at the table before then - that I did not know. And
of course I would have shot myself if it hadn’t been for that girl.

II
You see: though it made no difference to me, I did still feel pain, for instance. If
someone hit me, I would feel pain. The same in the moral respect: if something
very pitiful happened, I would feel pity, just as when it still made a difference to me
in life. And I felt pity that night: I certainly would have helped a child. Why, then,


had I not helped the little girl? From an idea that had come along then: as she
was pulling and calling to me, a question suddenly arose before me, and I couldn’t
resolve it. The question was an idle one, but I got angry. I got angry owing to the
conclusion that, if I had already resolved to kill myself that night, it followed that
now more than ever everything in the world should make no difference to me. Why,
then, did I suddenly feel that it did make a difference, and that I pitied the girl? I
remember that I pitied her very much; even to the point of some strange pain, even
quite incredible in my situation. Really, I’m unable to express the fleeting feeling I
had then any better, but the feeling continued at home as well, when I had already
settled at my table, and I was extremely vexed, as I hadn’t been for a long time.
Reasoning flowed from reasoning. It seemed clear that, if I was a man and not yet a
zero, then, as long as I did not turn into a zero, I was alive, and consequently could
suffer, be angry, and feel shame for my actions. Good. But if I was going to kill
myself in two hours, for instance, then what was the girl to me and what did I care
then about shame or anything in the world? I turned into a zero, an absolute zero.
And could it be that the awareness that I would presently cease to exist altogether,
and that therefore nothing would exist, could not have the slightest influence either
on my feeling of pity of the girl, or upon the feeling of shame after the meanness
I had committed? And I had stamped and shouted at the unfortunate child in a
savage voice precisely because, “you see, not only do I feel no pity, but even if I
commit some inhuman meanness, I can do so now, because in two hours everything
will be extinguished.” Do you believe this was why I shouted? I’m now almost
convinced of it. It seemed clear that life and the world were now as if dependent on
me. One might even say that the world was now as if made for me alone: I’d shoot
myself and there would be no more world, at least for me. Not to mention that
maybe there would indeed be nothing for anyone after me, and that as soon as my
consciousness was extinguished, the whole world would be extinguished at once, like
a phantom, like a mere accessory of my consciousness, it would be done away with,
for maybe all this world and all these people were - just myself alone. I remember
that, sitting and reasoning, I turned all these new questions, which came crowding
one after another, even in quite a different direction and invented something quite
new. For instance, there suddenly came to me a strange consideration, that if I had
once lived on the moon or on Mars, and had committed some most shameful and
dishonorable act there, such as can only be imagined, and had been abused and
dishonored for it as one can only perhaps feel and imagine in a dream, a nightmare,
and if, ending up later on earth, I continued to preserve an awareness of what I had
done on the other planet, and knew at the same time that I would never ever return
there, then, looking from the earth to the moon - would it make any difference to
me, or not? Would I feel shame for that act, or not? The questions were idle and
superfluous, since the revolver was already lying in front of me, and I knew with
my whole being that this was certain to be, but they excited me, and I was getting
furious. It was as if I couldn’t die now without first resolving something. In short,
this girl saved me, because with the questions I postponed the shot. Meanwhile,
everything was also quieting down at the captain’s: they had ended their card game
and were settling down to sleep, grumbling and lazily finishing their squabbles. It
was then that I suddenly fell asleep, something that had never happened to me
before, at the table, in the armchair. I fell asleep quite imperceptibly to myself.
Dreams, as is known, are extremely strange: one thing is pictured with the most


terrible clarity, with a jeweler’s thoroughness in the finish of its details, and over
other things you skip as if without noticing them at all - for instance, over space
and time. Dreams apparently proceed not from reason but from desire, not from
the head but from the heart, and yet what clever things my reason has sometimes
performed in sleep! And yet quite inconceivable things happen with it in sleep. My
brother, for instance, died five years ago. Sometimes I see him in my dreams: he
takes part in my doings, we are both very interested, and yet I remember and am
fully aware, throughout the whole dream, that my brother is dead and buried. Why,
then, am I not surprised that, though he is dead, he is still here by me and busy
with me? Why does my reason fully admit all this? But enough. I’ll get down to
my dream. Yes, I had this dream then, my dream of the third of November! They
tease me now that it was just a dream. But does it make any difference whether
it was a dream or not, if this dream proclaimed the Truth to me? For if you once
knew the truth and saw it, then you know that it is the truth and there is and can
be no other, whether you’re asleep or alive. So let it be a dream, let it be, but this
life, which you extol so much, I wanted to extinguish by suicide, while my dream,
my dream - oh, it proclaimed to me a new, great, renewed strong life!
Listen.

III
I said that I fell asleep imperceptibly and even as if while continuing to reason
about the same matters. Suddenly I dreamed that I took the revolver and, sitting
there, aimed it straight at my heart - my heart, not my head; thought I had resolved
earlier to shoot myself in the head, and precisely in the right temple. Having aimed
it at my chest, I waited for a second or two, and my candle, the table, and the wall
facing me suddenly started moving and heaving. I hastily fired.
In dreams you sometimes fall from a height, or are stabbed, or beaten, but you
never feel pain except when you are somehow really hurt in bed, then you do feel
pain and it almost always wakes you up. So it was in my dream: I felt no pain, but I
imagined that, as I fired, everything shook inside me and everything suddenly went
out, and it became terribly black around me. I became as if blind and dumb, and
now I’m lying on something hard, stretched out on my back, I don’t see anything
and can’t make the slightest movement. Around me there is walking and shouting,
there is the captain’s bass and the landlady’s shrieking - and suddenly another
break, and now I’m being carried in a closed coffin. And I feel the coffin heave and
I start reasoning about that, when suddenly for the first time I’m struck by the
idea that I’m dead, quite dead, I know this and do not doubt it, I can’t see, I can’t
move, yet I feel and reason. But I quickly come to terms with it and, as is usual in
dreams accept the reality without arguing.
And now, they bury me in the ground. Everyone leaves, I’m alone, completely
alone. I can’t move. Always before, whenever I actually imagined to myself how I
would be buried in the grave, my only association with the grave proper was the
feeling of dampness and cold. So now, too, I felt that I was very cold, especially
the tips of my toes, but I didn’t feel anything else.
I lay there and, strangely - didn’t expect anything, accepting without argument
that a dead man has nothing to expect. But it was damp. I don’t know how much
time passed - an hour, or a few days, or many days. But then suddenly a drop



of water that had seeped through the lid of the coffin fell on my closed left eye,
another followed it in a minute, then a third a minute later, and so on and so on,
with a minute’s interval. A deep indignation suddenly blazed up in my heart, and
suddenly I felt physical pain in it. “It’s my wound,” I thought, “it’s my shot, there’s
a bullet there. . . ” The drop kept dripping, each minute and straight onto my closed
eye. And I suddenly called out, not in a voice, for I was motionless, but with my
whole being, to the master of all that was coming to pass with me.
“Whoever you are, if you’re there, and if there exists anything more reasonable
than what is coming to pass now, allow it to be here, too. And if you are taking
revenge on me for my unreasonable suicide by the ugliness and absurdity of my
subsequent existence, know, then, that no matter what torment befalls me, it will
never equal the contempt I am silently going to feel, even if the torment were to
last a million years! . . . ”
I called out and fell silent. For almost a whole minute the deep silence lasted,
and one more drop even fell, but I knew, boundlessly and inviolably, I knew and
believed that everything was certain to change presently. And then suddenly my
grave gaped wide. That is, I don’t know whether it was opened and dug up, but I
was taken by some dark being unknown to me, and we found ourselves in space. I
suddenly could see again: it was deep night, and never, never has there been such
darkness! We were rushing through space far from earth. I did not ask the one
carrying me about anything, I waited and was proud. I assured myself that I was
not afraid and swooned with delight at the thought that I was not afraid. I don’t
remember how long we rushed like that, and cannot imagine it: everything was
happening as it always does in dreams, when you leap over space and time and
over laws of being and reason, and pause only on the points of the heart’s reverie. I
remember that I suddenly saw a little star in the darkness. “Is that Sirius?” I asked,
suddenly unable to restrain myself, for I did not want to ask about anything. “No,
it is the very star you saw between the clouds, as you were returning home,” the
being who was carrying me replied. I knew that it had as if a human countenance.
Strangely, I did not like this being, I even felt a deep revulsion. I had expected
complete nonexistence and with that had shot myself in the heart. And here I am
in the hands of a being - not a human one, of course - but who is, who exists:
“Ah, so there is life beyond the grave!” I thought with the strange lightmindedness
of dreams, but the essence of my heart remained with me in all its depth: “And
if I must be again,” I thought, “and live again according to someone’s ineluctable
will, I don’t want to be defeated and humiliated!” “You know I’m afraid of you,
and you despise me for it,” I said suddenly to my companion, unable to hold back
the humiliating question, which contained a confession, and feeling my humiliation
like the prick of a needle in my heart. He did not answer my question, but I
suddenly felt that I was not despised or laughed at, and not even pitied, and that
our journey had an unknown and mysterious purpose which concerned me alone.
Fear was growing in my heart. Something was being communicated to me, mutely
but tormentingly, from my silent companion, and was as if penetrating me. We were
rushing through dark and unknown spaces. I had long ceased to see constellations
familiar to the eye. I knew that in the heavenly spaces there were stars whose
light reached the earth only after thousands or millions of years. Maybe we were
already flying through those spaces. I awaited something in a terrible anguish that
wrung my heart. And suddenly the call of some highly familiar feeling shook me:


I suddenly saw our sun! I knew it could not be our sun, which had generated our
earth, and that we were at an infinite distance from our sun, but for some reason
I recognized, with my whole being, that it was absolutely the same as our sun, its
replica and double. The call of a sweet feeling sounded delightfully in my soul: the
native power of light, the same light that gave birth to me, echoed in my heart and
resurrected it, and I felt life, the former life, for the first time after my grave.
“But if this is the sun, if this is absolutely the same as our sun,” I cried out,
“then where is the earth?” And my companion pointed to the little star that shone
in the darkness with an emerald brilliance. We were rushing straight toward her.
“And are such replicas really possible in the universe, is that really the law
of nature? . . . And if that is the earth there, is it really the same as our earth
. . . absolutely the same, unfortunate, poor, but dear and eternally beloved, giving
birth to the same tormenting love for herself even in her most ungrateful children?. . . ” I cried out, shaking with irrepressible, rapturous love for that former
native earth I had abandoned. The image of the poor little girl whom I had offended flashed before me.
“You will see all,” my companion replied, and some sadness sounded in his words.
But we were quickly approaching the planet. It was growing before my eyes, I could
already make out the ocean, the outlines of Europe, and suddenly a strange feeling
of some great, holy jealousy blazed up in my heart: “How can there be such a
replica, and what for? I love, I can love, only the earth I left, where the stains of
my blood were left, when I, the ungrateful one, extinguished my life with a shot
in the heart. But never, never did I cease to love that earth, and even on that
night, as I was parting from her, I perhaps loved her more tormentingly than ever
before. Is there suffering on this new earth? On our earth we can love truly only
with suffering and through suffering! We’re unable to love otherwise and we know
no other love. I want suffering, in order to love. I want, I thirst, to kiss, this very
minute, pouring out tears, that one earth alone which I left, and I do not want, I
do not accept life on any other! . . . ”
But my companion had already left me. Suddenly, as if quite imperceptibly,
I came to stand on this other earth, in the bright light of a sunny day, lovely as
paradise. I was standing, it seems, on one of those islands which on our earth make
up the Greek archipelago, or somewhere on the coast of the mainland adjacent to
that archipelago. Oh, everything was exactly as with us, but seemed everywhere
to radiate some festivity and a great, holy, and finally attained triumph. The
gentle emerald se splashed softly against the shores and kissed them with love plain, visible, almost conscious. Tall, beautiful trees stood in all the luxury of
their flowering, and their numberless leaves, I was convinced, greeted me with their
soft, gentle sound, as if uttering words of love. The grass glittered with bright,
fragrant flowers. Flocks of birds flew about in the air and, fearless of me, landed
on my shoulders and arms, joyfully beating me with their dear, fluttering wings.
And finally I got to see and know the people of that happy earth. They came to
me themselves, they surrounded me, kissed me. Children of the sun, children of
their sun - oh, how beautiful they were! Never on earth have I seen such beauty
in man. Maybe only in our children, in their first years, can one find a remote,
though faint, glimmer of that beauty. The eyes of these happy people shone with
clear brightness. Their faces radiated reason and a sort of consciousness fulfilled to
the point of serenity, yet they were mirthful faces; a childlike joy sounded in the



words and voices of these people. Oh, at once, with the first glance at their faces,
I understood everything, everything! This was the earth undefiled by the fall, the
people who lived on it had not sinned, they lived in the same paradise in which,
according to the legends of all mankind, our fallen forefathers lived, with the only
difference that the whole earth here was everywhere one and the same paradise.
These people, laughing joyfully, crowded around me and caressed me; they took
me with them and each of them wished to set me at ease. Oh, they didn’t ask
me about anything, but it seemed to me as if they already knew everything, and
wished quickly to drive the torment from my face.

IV
You see, once again: well, let it be only a dream! But the feeling of love from these
innocent and beautiful people remained in me ever after, and I feel that their love
pours upon me from there even now. I saw them myself, I knew them and was
convinced, I loved them, I suffered for them afterward. Oh I at once understood,
even then, that in many ways I would never understand them; to me, a modern
Russian progressive and vile Petersburger, it seemed insoluble, for instance, that
they, while knowing so much, did not have our science. But I soon realized that
their knowledge was fulfilled and nourished by different insights than on our earth,
and that their aspirations were also quite different. They did not wish for anything
and were at peace, they did not aspire to a knowledge of life, as we do, because
their life was fulfilled. But their knowledge was deeper and loftier than our science;
for our science seeks to explain what life is it aspires to comprehend it, in order
to teach others to live; but they know how to live even without science, and I
understood that, but I could not understand their knowledge. They pointed out
their trees to me, and I could not understand the extent of the love with which they
looked at them: as if they were talking with creatures of their own kind. And you
know, perhaps I wouldn’t be mistaken if I said that they did talk to them! Yes,
they had found their language, and I’m convinced that the trees understood them.
They looked at the whole of nature in the same way - at the animals, who lived
in peace with them, did not attack them, and loved them, won over by their love.
They pointed out the stars to me and talked of them with me about something
I couldn’t understand, but I’m convinced that they had some contact, as it were,
with the heavenly stars, not just in thought, but in some living way. Oh, these
people did not even try to make me understand them, they loved me even without
that, but on the other hand I knew that they would also never understand me, and
therefor I hardly ever spoke to them about our earth. I only kissed before them
that earth on which they lived and wordlessly adored them, and they saw it allowed
me to adore them without being ashamed of my adoring them, because they loved
much themselves. They did not suffer for me when sometimes, in tears, I kissed
their feet, joyfully knowing at heart with what force of love they would respond
to me. At times I asked myself in astonishment: how could they manage, all this
while, not to insult a man such as I, and never once provoke in a man such as I
any feeling of jealousy or envy? Many times I asked myself how I, a braggart and
a liar, could manage not to speak to them about my knowledge - of which they,
of course, had no notion - not to wish to astonish them with it, if only out of love
for them? They were frisky and gay as children. They wandered through their


beautiful groves and forests, they sang their beautiful songs, they ate their light
food - fruit from their trees, honey from their forests, and milk from the animals
who loved them. For their food and clothing they labored little and but lightly.
There was love among them, and children were born, but I never observed in them
any impulses of that cruel sensuality that overtakes almost everyone on our earth,
each and every one, and is the only source of almost all the sins of our mankind.
They rejoiced in the children they had as new partakers of their bliss. Among them
there was no quarreling or jealousy, they did not even understand what it meant.
Their children were everyone’s children, because they all constituted one family.
They had almost no illnesses, though there was death; but their old people died
quietly, as if falling asleep, surrounded by those bidding them farewell, blessing
them, smiling at them, and receiving bright parting smiles themselves. I saw no
sorrow or tears at that, there was only love increased as if to the point of rapture,
but a rapture that was calm, fulfilled, contemplative. One might think they were
in touch with their dead even after their death and that the earthly union between
them was not interrupted by death. They barely understood me when I asked them
about eternal life, but they were apparently so convinced of it unconsciously that
it did not constitute a question for them. They had no temples, but they had some
essential, living, and constant union with the Entirety of the universe; they had no
faith, but instead had a firm knowledge that when their earthly joy was fulfilled to
the limits of earthly nature, there would then come for them, both for the living
and for the dead, a still greater expansion of their contract with the Entirety of
the universe. They waited for this moment with joy, but without haste, without
suffering over it, but as if already having it in the presages of their hearts, which
they conveyed to one another. In the evenings, before going to sleep, they liked
to sing in balanced, harmonious choruses. In these songs they expressed all the
feelings that the departing day had given them, praised it, and bade it farewell.
They praised nature, the earth, the sea, the forest. They liked to compose songs
about each other and praised each other like children; these were the most simple
songs, but they flowed from teh heart and penetrated hearts. And not in songs
only, but it seemed they spent their whole life only in admiring each other. It was a
sort of mutual being-in-love, total, universal. And some of their songs, solemn and
rapturous, I hardly understood at all. While I understood the words, I was never
able to penetrate their full meaning. It remained as if inaccessible to my mind, yet
my heart was as if unconsciously pervaded by it more and more. I often told them
that I had long ago had a presentiment of all this, that all this joy and glory had
already spoken to me on our earth in a anguished call, sometimes reaching the point
of unbearable sorrow; that I had a presentiment of them all and of their glory in the
dreams of my heart and the reveries of my mind, that I had often been unable, on
our earth, to watch the setting sun without tears . . . That my hatred of the people
of our earth always contained anguish: why am I unable to hate them without
loving them, why am I unable not to forgive them, and why is there anguish in my
love for them: why am I unable to love them without hating them? They listened
to me, and I saw that they could not imagine what I was talking about, but I did
not regret talking to them about it: I knew they understood all the intensity of my
anguish for those whom I had abandoned. Yes, when they looked at me with their
dear eyes pervaded by love, when I felt that in their presence my heart, too, became


as innocent and truthful as theirs, I did not regret not understanding them. The
feeling of the fullness of life took my breath away, and I silently worshipped them.
Oh, everyone laughs in my face now and assures me that even in dreams one
cannot see such details as I’m now telling, that in my dream I saw or felt only a
certain sensation generated by my own heart in delirium, and that I invented the
details when I woke up. And when I disclosed to them that perhaps it was actually
so - God, what laughter they threw in my face, and what fun they had at my
expense! Oh, yes, of course, I was overcome just by the sensation of that dream, and
it alone survived in the bloody wound of my heart: yet the real images and forms
of my dream, that is, those that I actually saw at the time of my dreaming, were
fulfilled so harmoniously, they were so enchanting and beautiful, and so true, that
having awakened, I was, of course, unable to embody them in our weak words, so
that they must have been as if effaced in my mind, and therefore, indeed, perhaps
I myself unconsciously was forced to invent the details afterward; and of course
distorted them, especially with my so passionate desire to hurry and tell them at
least somehow. And yet how can I not believe that it all really was? And was,
perhaps a thousand times better, brighter, and more joyful than I’m telling? Let
it be a dream, still it all could not but be. You know, I’ll tell you a secret: perhaps
it wasn’t a dream at all! For here a certain thing happened, something so terribly
true that it couldn’t have been imagined in a dream. Let my dream have been
generated by my heart, but was my heart alone capable of generating the terrible
truth that happened to me afterward? How could I myself invent or imagine it
in my heart? Can it be that my paltry heart and capricious, insignificant mind
were able to rise to such a revelation of the truth! Oh, judge for yourselves: I’ve
concealed it so far, but now I’ll finish telling this truth as well. The thing was that
I . . . corrupted them all!

V
Yes, yes, it ended with me corrupting them all! How it could have happened I don’t
know, but I remember it clearly. The dream flew through thousands of years and
left in me just a sense of the whole. I know only that the cause of the fall was I. Like
a foul trichina, like an atom of plague infecting whole countries, so I infected that
whole happy and previously sinless earth with myself. They learned to lie and began
to love the lie and knew the beauty of the lie. Oh, maybe it started innocently,
with a joke, with coquetry, with amorous play, maybe, indeed, with an atom, but
this atom of lie penetrated their hearts, and they liked it. Then sensuality was
quickly born, sensuality generated jealousy, and jealousy - cruelty. . . Oh, I don’t
know, I don’t remember, but soon, very soon, the first blood was shed; they were
astonished and horrified, and began to part, to separate. Alliances appeared, but
against each other now. Rebukes, reproaches began. They knew shame, and shame
was made into a virtue. The notion of honor was born, and each alliance raised its
own banner. They began tormenting animals, and the animals withdrew from them
into the forests and became their enemies. There began the struggle for separation,
for isolation, for the personal, for mine and yours. They started speaking different
languages. They knew sorrow and came to love sorrow, they thirsted for suffering
and said that truth is attained only through suffering. Then science appeared
among them. When they became wicked, they began to talk of brotherhood and

humaneness and understood these ideas. When they became criminal, they invented
justice and prescribed whole codices for themselves in order to maintain it, and to
ensure the codices they set up the guillotine. They just barely remembered what
they had lost, and did not even want to believe that they had once been innocent
and happy. They even laughed at the possibility of the former happiness and called
it a dream. They couldn’t even imagine it in forms and images, but - strange and
wonderful thing - having lost all belief in their former happiness, having called it
a fairy tale, they wised so much to be innocent and happy again, once more, that
they fell down before their hearts’ desires like children, they deified their desire,
they built temples and started praying to their own idea, their own “desire,” all the
while fully believing in its unrealizability and unfeasibility, but adoring it in tears
and worshipping it. And yet, if it had so happened that they could have returned to
that innocent and happy condition which they had lost, or if someone had suddenly
shown it to them again and asked them: did they want to go back to it? - they
would certainly have refused. They used to answer me: “Granted we’re deceitful,
wicked and unjust, we know that and weep for it, and we torment ourselves over it,
and torture and punish ourselves perhaps even more than that merciful judge who
will judge us and whose name we do not know. But we have science, and through it
we shall again find the truth, but we shall now accept it consciously, knowledge is
higher than feelings, the consciousness of life is higher than life. Science will give us
wisdom, wisdom will discover laws, and knowledge of the laws of happiness is higher
than happiness.” That’s what they used to say, and after such words each of them
loved himself more than anyone else, and they couldn’t have done otherwise. Each
of them became so jealous of his own person that he tried as hard as he could to
humiliate and belittle it in others, and gave his life to that. Slavery appeared, even
voluntary slavery: the weak willingly submitted to the strong, only so as to help
them crush those still weaker than themselves. Righteous men appeared, who came
to these people in tears and spoke to them of their pride, their lack of measure and
harmony, their loss of shame. They were derided or stoned. Holy blood was spilled
on the thresholds of temples. On the other hand, people began to appear who
started inventing ways for everyone to unite again so that each of them, without
ceasing to love himself more than anyone else, would at the same time not hinder
others, and thus live all together in a harmonious society, as it were. Whole wars
arose because of this idea. At the same time, the warring sides all firmly believed
that science, wisdom, and the sense of self-preservation would finally force men to
unite in a harmonious and reasonable society, and therefore, to speed things up
meanwhile, the “wise” tried quickly to exterminate all the “unwise,” who did not
understand their idea, so that they would not hinder its triumph. But the sense of
self-preservation quickly began to weaken, proud men and sensualists appeared who
directly demanded everything or nothing. To acquire everything, they resorted to
evildoing, and if that did not succeed - to suicide. Religions appeared with a cult of
nonbeing and self-destruction for the sake of eternal peace in nothingness. Finally,
these people grew weary in meaningless toil, and suffering appeared on their faces,
and these people proclaimed that suffering is beauty, for only in suffering is there
thought. They sang suffering in their songs. I walked among them, wringing my
hands, and wept over them, but I loved them perhaps still more than before, when
there was as yet no suffering on their faces and they were innocent and so beautiful.
I loved their defiled earth still more than when it had been a paradise, only because


grief had appeared on it. Alas, I had always loved grief and sorrow, but only for
myself, for myself, while over them I wept, pitying them. I stretched out my arms
to them, in despair accusing, cursing, and despising myself. I told them that I, I
alone, had done it all; that it was I who had brought them depravity, infection,
and the lie! I beseeched them to crucify me on a cross, I taught them how to make
a cross. I couldn’t, I hadn’t the strength to kill myself, but I wanted to take the
suffering from them, I longed for suffering, I longed to shed my blood to the last
drop in this suffering. But they just laughed at me and in the end began to consider
me some sort of holy fool. They vindicated me, they said they had received only
what they themselves had wanted, and that everything could not but be as it was.
Finally, they announced to me that I was becoming dangerous for them and that
they would put me in a madhouse if I didn’t keep quiet. Here sorrow entered my
soul with such force that my heart was wrung, and I felt I was going to die, and
here . . . well, here I woke up.

It was already morning, that is, not light yet, but it was about six o’clock. I came to
my senses in the same armchair, my candle had burned all the way down, everyone
was asleep at the captain’s, and around me was a silence rare in our apartment.
First of all, I jumped up extremely surprised; nothing like that had ever happened
to me, even down to trifling little details: for instance, never before had I fallen
asleep in my armchair like that. Here suddenly, while I was standing and coming to
my senses - suddenly my revolver flashed before me, ready, loaded - but I instantly
pushed it away from me! Oh, life, life now! I lifted up my arms and called out to the
eternal truth; did not call out, but wept; rapture, boundless rapture, elevated my
whole being. Yes, life and - preaching! I decided on preaching that same moment,
and, of course, for the rest of my life! I’m going out to preach, I want to preach what? The truth, for I saw it, saw it with my own eyes, saw all its glory!
And so, since then I’ve been preaching! What’s more - I love those who laugh
at me more than all the rest. Why that’s so I don’t know and can’t explain, but
let it be so. They say I’m already getting confused now, that is, if I’m already so
confused now, how will it be later? The veritable truth: I’m getting confused now,
and maybe it will be worse later. And of course I’m going to get confused a few
times before I discover how to preach, that is, in what words and in what deeds,
because it’s very hard to do. I see it clear as day even now, but listen: is there
anyone who doesn’t get confused? And yet everyone goes toward one and the same
thing, at least everyone strives for one and the same thing, from the sage to the
last robber, only by different paths. This is an old truth, but what is new here is
this: I cannot get very confused. Because I saw the truth, I saw and I know that
people can be beautiful and happy without losing the ability to live on earth. I will
not and cannot believe that evil is the normal condition of people. And they all
laugh merely at this belief of mine. But how can I not believe: I saw the truth it’s not that my mind invented it, but I saw it, I saw it, and its living image filled
my soul for all time. I saw it in such fulfilled wholeness that I cannot believe it is
impossible for people to have it. And so, how could I get confused? I’ll wander off,
of course, even several times, and will maybe even speak in other people’s words,
but not for long: the living image of what I saw will always be with me and will
always correct and direct me. Oh, I’m hale, I’m fresh, I’m going, going, even if it’s


for a thousand years. You know, I even wanted to conceal, at first, that I corrupted
them all, but that was a mistake - already the first mistake! But truth whispered
to me that I was lying, and guarded and directed me. But how to set up paradise
- I don’t know, because I’m unable to put it into words. After my dream, I lost
words. At least all the main words, the most necessary ones. But so be it: I’ll go
and I’ll keep talking, tirelessly, because after all I saw it with my own eyes, thought
I can’t recount what I saw. But that is what the scoffers don’t understand: “He
had a dream,” they say, “a delirium, a hallucination.” Eh! As if that’s so clever?
And how proud they are! A dream? what is a dream? And is our life not a dream?
I’ll say more: let it never, let it never come true, and let there be no paradise (that
I can understand!) - well, but I will preach all the same. And yet it’s so simple: in
one day, in one hour - it could all be set up at once! The main thing is - love others
as yourself, that’s the main thing, and it’s everything, there’s no need for anything
else at all: it will immediately be discovered how to set things up. And yet this is
merely an old truth, repeated and read a billion times, but still it has never taken
root! “The consciousness of life is higher than life, the knowledge of the laws of
happiness is higher than happiness” - that is what must be fought! And I will. If
only everyone wants it, everything can be set up at once.

And I found that little girl . . . And I’ll go! I’ll go!

