Chapter One
I
UNABLE TO RESTRAIN myself, I have sat down to record this history of
my first steps on life’s career, though I could have done as well without it.
One thing I know for certain: never again will I sit down to write my
autobiography, even if I live to be a hundred. You have to be all too basely
in love with yourself to write about yourself without shame. My only
excuse is that I’m not writing for the same reason everyone else writes, that
is, for the sake of the reader’s praises. If I have suddenly decided to record
word for word all that has happened to me since last year, then I have
decided it as the result of an inner need: so struck I am by everything that
has happened. I am recording only the events, avoiding with all my might
everything extraneous, and above all—literary beauties. A literary man
writes for thirty years and in the end doesn’t know at all why he has written
for so many years. I am not a literary man, do not want to be a literary man,
and would consider it base and indecent to drag the insides of my soul and a
beautiful description of my feelings to their literary marketplace. I
anticipate with vexation, however, that it seems impossible to do entirely
without the description of feelings and without reflections (maybe even
banal ones): so corrupting is the effect of any literary occupation on a man,
even if it is undertaken only for oneself. The reflections may even be very
banal, because something you value yourself will quite possibly have no
value in a stranger’s eyes. But this is all an aside. Anyhow, here is my
preface; there won’t be anything more of its kind. To business; though
there’s nothing trickier than getting down to some sort of business—maybe
even any sort.

II
I BEGIN, THAT IS, I would like to begin my notes from the nineteenth of
September last year, that is, exactly from the day when I first met . . .

But to explain whom I met just like that, beforehand, when nobody
knows anything, would be banal; I suppose even the tone is banal: having
promised myself to avoid literary beauties, I fall into those beauties with the
first line. Besides, in order to write sensibly, it seems the wish alone is not
enough. I will also observe that it seems no European language is so
difficult to write in as Russian. I have now reread what I’ve just written, and
I see that I’m much more intelligent than what I’ve written. How does it
come about that what an intelligent man expresses is much stupider than
what remains inside him? I’ve noticed that about myself more than once in
my verbal relations with people during this last fateful year and have
suffered much from it.
Though I’m starting with the nineteenth of September, I’ll still put in a
word or two about who I am, where I was before then, and therefore also
what might have been in my head, at least partly, on that morning of the
nineteenth of September, so that it will be more understandable to the
reader, and maybe to me as well.

III
I AM A HIGH-SCHOOL graduate, and am now going on twenty-one. My
last name is Dolgoruky, and my legal father is Makar Ivanovich
Dolgoruky,1 a former household serf of the Versilov family. Thus I’m a
legitimate, though in the highest degree illegitimate, son, and my origin is
not subject to the slightest doubt. It happened like this: twenty-two years
ago, the landowner Versilov (it’s he who is my father), twenty-five years of
age, visited his estate in Tula province. I suppose at that time he was still
something rather faceless. It’s curious that this man, who impressed me so
much ever since my childhood, who had such a capital influence on my
entire cast of mind and has maybe even infected my whole future with
himself for a long time to come—this man even now remains in a great
many ways a complete riddle to me. But of that, essentially, later. You can’t
tell it like that. My whole notebook will be filled with this man as it is.
He had become a widower just at that time, that is, in the twenty-fifth
year of his life. He had married someone from high society, but not that

rich, named Fanariotov, and had had a son and a daughter by her. My
information about this spouse who abandoned him so early is rather
incomplete and lost among my materials; then, too, much about the private
circumstances of Versilov’s life has escaped me, so proud he always was
with me, so haughty, closed, and negligent, despite his moments of striking
humility, as it were, before me. I mention, however, so as to mark it for the
future, that he ran through three fortunes in his life, even quite big ones,
some four hundred thousand in all, and maybe more. Now, naturally, he
hasn’t got a kopeck . . .
He came to the country then, “God knows why”—at least that was how
he put it to me later. His little children were, as usual, not with him but with
some relations; that was what he did with his children, legitimate and
illegitimate, all his life. There was a significant number of household serfs
on this estate; among them was the gardener Makar Ivanovich Dolgoruky. I
will add here, to be rid of it once and for all: rarely can anyone have been so
thoroughly angered by his last name as I was throughout my whole life.
That was stupid, of course, but it was so. Each time I entered some school
or met persons to whom I owed an accounting because of my age, in short,
every little teacher, tutor, inspector, priest, anybody you like, they would
ask my last name and, on hearing that I was Dolgoruky, would inevitably
find it somehow necessary to add:
“Prince Dolgoruky?”
And each time I was obliged to explain to all these idle people:
“No, simply Dolgoruky.”
This simply began, finally, to drive me out of my mind. I will note with
that, as a phenomenon, that I do not recall a single exception: everybody
asked. Some of them seemingly had no need at all to ask; who the devil
could have had any need of it, I’d like to know? But everybody asked,
everybody to a man. Hearing that I was simply Dolgoruky, the asker
ordinarily measured me with a dull and stupidly indifferent look, indicating
thereby that he did not know himself why he had asked, and walked away.

My schoolmates were the most insulting. How does a schoolboy question a
newcomer? A lost and abashed newcomer, on the first day he enters school
(no matter what kind), is a common victim: he is ordered around, he is
teased, he is treated like a lackey. Some hale and fat boy suddenly stops
right in front of his victim and looks at him point-blank for several
moments with a long, stern, and arrogant gaze. The newcomer stands
silently before him, looks askance, if he’s not a coward, and waits for
whatever is coming.
“What’s your last name?”
“Dolgoruky.”
“Prince Dolgoruky?”
“No, simply Dolgoruky.”
“Ah, simply! Fool!”
And he’s right; there is nothing stupider than to be called Dolgoruky
without being a prince. I drag this stupidity around on my back without any
guilt. Later on, when I began to get very angry, to the question “Are you a
prince?” I always answered, “No, I’m the son of a household servant, a
former serf.”
Then, when I got angry in the last degree, to the question “Are you a
prince?” I once answered firmly, “No, simply Dolgoruky, the illegitimate
son of my former master, Mr. Versilov.”
I had already thought that up when I was in the sixth class2 in high
school, and though I quickly became convinced beyond doubt that it was
stupid, all the same I did not stop being stupid at once. I remember that one
of my teachers—though he was the only one—found me “full of a vengeful
and civic idea.” Generally they took this escapade with a sort of offensive
thoughtfulness. Finally, one of my classmates, a very sarcastic fellow, with
whom I spoke only once a year, said to me with a serious air, but looking
somewhat askance:

“Such feelings, of course, do you honor, and you undoubtedly have
something to be proud of; but all the same, if I were in your place, I
wouldn’t celebrate my illegitimacy so much . . . you sound like a birthday
boy!”
Since then I stopped boasting that I was illegitimate.
I repeat, it’s very difficult to write in Russian: here I’ve scribbled a whole
three pages on how I’ve spent all my life being angry over my last name,
and meanwhile the reader has surely concluded that I’m angry precisely
because I’m not a prince, but simply Dolgoruky. To explain again and
justify myself would be humiliating for me.

IV
AND SO, AMONG this household, of whom there were a great many
besides Makar Ivanovich, there was a girl, and she was already about
eighteen years old when the fifty-year-old Makar Dolgoruky suddenly
showed the intention of marrying her. Marriages between domestics, as is
known, were concluded in the time of serfdom with the permission of the
masters, and sometimes even on their orders. There was an aunt about the
estate then; that is, she wasn’t my aunt, she was a landowner herself; yet, I
don’t know why, but all her life everybody called her aunt, not only mine,
but in general, in Versilov’s family as well, to which she was in fact almost
related. This was Tatyana Pavlovna Prutkov. At that time she still had
thirty-five souls of her own, in the same province and the same district. She
didn’t really manage Versilov’s estate (of five hundred souls), but
supervised it in a neighborly way, and that supervision, as I heard, was
worth the supervision of some educated manager. However, I really don’t
care about her knowledge; I only want to add, setting aside all thought of
flattery and fawning, that this Tatyana Pavlovna is a noble and even original
being.
Now, she not only did not decline the marital inclinations of the gloomy
Makar Dolgoruky (they say he was gloomy then), but, on the contrary, for
some reason encouraged them in the highest degree. Sofya Andreevna (the

eighteen-year-old serf girl, that is, my mother) had been an orphan for
several years already; her deceased father, also a household serf, who had
an extraordinary respect for Makar Dolgoruky and was obliged to him for
something, as he was dying six years earlier, on his deathbed, they say even
a quarter of an hour before his last breath, so that if need be it could have
been taken for delirium, had he not been legally disqualified anyway as a
serf, summoned Makar Dolgoruky, in front of all the servants and with a
priest present, and spoke his will to him loudly and insistently, pointing to
his daughter: “Bring her up and take her to wife.” Everybody heard it. As
for Makar Ivanovich, I don’t know in what sense he later married her, that
is, with great pleasure or only to fulfill his responsibility. Most likely he had
an air of total indifference. This was a man who even then already knew
how to “show himself.” He was not exactly a Bible reader or literate man
(though he knew the whole church service and especially the lives of
certain saints, but more from hearsay), nor exactly a sort of household
reasoner, so to speak; he simply had a stubborn character, sometimes even
recklessly so; he spoke with pretension, judged irrevocably, and, in
conclusion, “lived deferentially”—in his own amazing expression. That is
how he was then. Of course, he achieved universal respect, but they say
everyone found him unbearable. It was quite a different matter when he left
the household: then people never referred to him otherwise than as some
sort of saint and great sufferer. That I know for certain.
As for my mother’s character, Tatyana Pavlovna kept her around herself
until she was eighteen, despite the steward’s urgings to send her to Moscow
for an apprenticeship, and she gave her some education, that is, taught her
to cut and sew, to walk in a ladylike way, and even to read a little. My
mother never could write passably. In her eyes this marriage to Makar
Ivanovich had long been a decided thing, and she found all that happened to
her then excellent and the very best; she went to the altar with the calmest
air possible on such an occasion, so that Tatyana Pavlovna herself called her
a fish then. All this about my mother’s character at that time I heard from
Tatyana Pavlovna herself. Versilov came to the estate exactly six months
after the wedding.

V

I ONLY WANT to say that I never could find out or make a satisfactory
surmise as to precisely how it started between him and my mother. I’m fully
prepared to believe, as he assured me himself last year, with a blush on his
face, even though he told about it all with a most unconstrained and “witty”
air, that there was not the least romance, and that it all happened just so. I
believe it was just so, and that little phrase just so is charming, but still I
always wanted to find out precisely how it came about with them. I myself
have hated all this vileness all my life and hate it still. Of course, here it’s
by no means only shameless curiosity on my part. I will note that until last
year I hardly knew my mother; from my infancy I had been handed over to
other people, for Versilov’s comfort, but of that later; and therefore I’m
quite unable to imagine what her face could have been like at that time. If
she was not really so good-looking, then what in her could have attracted
such a man as Versilov was at that time? This question is important for me
in that it highlights the man from an extremely curious side. That is why I
ask it, and not out of depravity. He himself, this gloomy and closed man,
with that sweet simpleheartedness he took from devil knows where (as if
out of his pocket) when he saw it was necessary—he himself told me that
he was quite a “silly young pup” then, not that he was sentimental, but just
so, he had recently read Anton the Wretch and Polinka Sachs3—two literary
works that had a boundless civilizing influence on our then rising
generation. He added that it was perhaps because of Anton the Wretch that
he had come to the estate then—and he added it extremely seriously. What
form could the beginning between this “silly pup” and my mother have
taken? It has just occurred to me that if I had at least one reader, he would
probably burst out laughing at me, as at a most ridiculous adolescent who,
having preserved his stupid innocence, barges with his reasonings and
solutions into things he doesn’t understand. Yes, indeed, I still don’t
understand, though I confess it not at all out of pride, because I know how
stupid this inexperience at the age of twenty can be; only I will tell the
gentleman that he himself does not understand, and I will prove it to him.
True, I know nothing about women, and I don’t want to know, because I’ll
spit on that all my life and I’ve given my word. But nevertheless I know for
certain that one woman attracts you by her beauty, or whatever it is, from
the first moment; another you have to chew over for half a year before you

understand what’s in her; and to make her out and fall in love with her, it’s
not enough to look and simply be ready for anything, on top of that you
have to be somehow gifted. I’m convinced of that, even though I know
nothing, and if it were otherwise, then all women would have to be reduced
at once to the level of simple domestic animals and kept around only in that
guise. Maybe a lot of people would like that.
I know positively from several hands that my mother was not a beauty,
though I haven’t seen her portrait from that time, which exists somewhere.
That means it was impossible to fall in love with her at first sight. For mere
“amusement,” Versilov could have chosen another girl, and there was one
like that, and unmarried besides, Anfisa Konstantinovna Sapozhkov, a
house maid. And a man who arrived with Anton the Wretch and, on the
basis of his rights as a landowner, violated the sacredness of marriage, even
though it was of his household serf, would be very ashamed in his own
eyes, because, I repeat, no more than a few months ago, that is, twenty
years later, he spoke extremely seriously of this Anton the Wretch. Yet
Anton only had a horse taken from him, and here it’s a wife! It means
something very peculiar happened, and that was why Mlle. Sapozhkov lost
(or won, in my opinion). I bothered him with all these questions a couple of
times last year, when it was possible to talk with him (because it was not
always possible to talk with him), and I noticed that, despite all his
worldliness and the space of twenty years, he somehow made an extremely
wry face. But I insisted. At least I remember him once murmuring
somehow strangely, with that air of worldly squeamishness he repeatedly
allowed himself with me, that my mother was a person of the defenseless
sort, whom you don’t really fall in love with—on the contrary, not at all—
but for some reason suddenly fall to pitying, for their meekness, is it, or for
what, anyhow? No one ever knows, but you go on pitying for a long time;
you pity and grow attached . . . “In short, my dear, it sometimes so happens
that you cannot even rid yourself of it.” That’s what he told me; and if it
really was so, then I’m forced to regard him as less of a stupid pup at that
time than he gives himself out to have been. And that was just what I
needed.

Anyhow, he started assuring me then that my mother fell in love with
him out of “lowliness”: he might just as well have said out of serfdom! He
lied in order to show off, lied against conscience, against honor and
nobility!
I’ve said all this, of course, in some sort of praise of my mother, and yet
I’ve already stated that I knew nothing about how she was then. Moreover, I
precisely know all the imperviousness of that milieu and of those pathetic
notions in which she had hardened since childhood and in which she
remained afterwards for the rest of her life. Nevertheless, the harm was
done. Incidentally, I must correct myself: having soared into the clouds, I
forgot about the fact which, on the contrary, ought to have been put forward
first of all—namely, that it started between them directly with the harm. (I
hope the reader will not put on airs to the extent of not understanding at
once what I mean to say.) In short, it started between them precisely in a
landowner’s way, even though Mlle. Sapozhkov was bypassed. But here I’ll
step in and state beforehand that I am by no means contradicting myself.
For what, O Lord, what could a man like Versilov possibly have talked
about at that time with a person like my mother, even in the event of the
most irresistible love? I’ve heard from depraved people that very often,
when a man comes together with a woman, he starts in complete silence,
which, of course, is the height of monstrosity and nausea; nevertheless,
Versilov, even if he had wanted to, would have been unable to start in any
other way with my mother. Could he have started by explaining Polinka
Sachs to her? And moreover, they couldn’t be bothered with Russian
literature; on the contrary, according to his own words (he got carried away
once), they hid in the corners, waited for each other on stairways, bounced
away from each other like rubber balls, red-faced, if somebody passed by,
and the “tyrant landowner” trembled before the least washer-woman,
despite all his serf-owning rights. But though it started in a landowner’s
way, it turned out to be not quite so, and, essentially, it’s still impossible to
explain anything. There’s even more darkness. The sheer dimensions to
which their love developed already constitute a riddle, because the first
condition of men like Versilov is to drop the girl immediately once the goal
is achieved. That, however, is not how it turned out. For a depraved “young
pup” (and they were all depraved, all of them to a man—both progressives

and retrogrades) to sin with a pretty, flirtatious serving girl (and my mother
was not flirtatious) was not only possible but inevitable, especially
considering his novelistic status as a young widower, and his idleness. But
to fall in love for one’s whole life—that is too much. I can’t guarantee that
he loved her, but that he dragged her with him all his life is quite true.
I’ve posed many questions, but there is one most important question
which, I’ll note, I’ve never dared to ask my mother directly, though I’ve
become quite close to her over the last year and, moreover, as a crude and
ungrateful pup who finds them guilty before him, have been quite
unceremonious with her. The question is the following: How could she, she
herself, already married for half a year, and crushed, too, by all the notions
of the legitimacy of marriage, crushed like a strengthless fly, she, who
respected her Makar Ivanovich as nothing less than some sort of God, how
could she, in a matter of two weeks, go so far as such a sin? For my mother
wasn’t a depraved woman, was she? On the contrary, I’ll say now
beforehand, that it is even difficult to imagine anyone being purer in soul,
and that for all her life afterwards. The only possible explanation is that she
did it unawares, that is, not in the sense that lawyers now affirm about their
murderers and thieves, but under that strong impression which, given a
certain simpleheartedness in the victim, takes over fatally and tragically.
Who knows, maybe she fell desperately in love . . . with the fashion of his
clothes, with the Parisian parting of his hair, with his French talk, precisely
French, of which she understood not a sound, that romance he sang at the
piano, fell in love with something she had never seen or heard before (and
he was very handsome), and at the same time fell in love, to the point of
prostration, with all of him, with all his fashions and romances. I’ve heard
that that sometimes happened with serving girls in the time of serfdom, and
with the most honest of them. I understand that, and he’s a scoundrel who
explains it by serfdom and “lowliness” alone! And so it means that this
young man could have enough of that direct and seductive power in him to
attract a being hitherto so pure and, above all, a being so completely
different from himself, from a totally different world and different land, and
to such obvious ruin? That it was to ruin—that I hope my mother has
always understood; only when she went to it, she wasn’t thinking of ruin at

all; but it’s always like that with these “defenseless” ones: they know it’s
ruin, and yet they get into it.
Having sinned, they immediately confessed. He wittily recounted to me
how he had sobbed on Makar Ivanovich’s shoulder, summoning him to his
study on purpose for the occasion, and she—at the time she was lying
unconscious somewhere in her maid’s closet . . .

VI
BUT ENOUGH OF questions and scandalous details. Versilov, having
bought out my mother from Makar Ivanovich, soon left, and since then, as I
have already written above, began dragging her with him almost
everywhere, except on those occasions when he was away for a long time;
then he most often left her in the custody of the aunt, that is, Tatyana
Pavlovna Prutkov, who always turned up from somewhere on such
occasions. They lived in Moscow, lived in various other villages and cities,
even abroad, and finally in Petersburg. Of all that later, if it’s worth it. I’ll
say only that a year after Makar Ivanovich, I came into the world, then a
year later my sister, and then, ten or eleven years later—a sickly boy, my
younger brother, who died after a few months. The painful delivery of this
child put an end to my mother’s beauty, or so at least I was told: she quickly
began to age and weaken.
But, all the same, connections with Makar Ivanovich were never broken
off. Wherever the Versilovs were, whether they lived in one place for
several years or moved about, Makar Ivanovich never failed to inform “the
family” of himself. Some sort of strange relations took shape, somewhat
solemn and almost serious. Among the gentry, something comical would
inevitably have mixed into such relations, I know that; but here it didn’t
happen. Letters were sent twice a year, neither more nor less, and they were
extremely like one another. I’ve seen them; there was little of anything
personal in them; on the contrary, they contained, as far as possible, only
solemn news about the most general events and the most general feelings, if
one can say that about feelings: news of his own health first of all, then
questions about health, then good wishes, solemn regards and blessings—

that’s all. This generality and impersonality seem precisely to constitute all
the propriety of tone and all the highest knowledge of behavior in that
milieu. “To my dearly beloved and esteemed spouse Sofya Andreevna I
send my humblest salutations . . .” “To our beloved children I send my
eternally steadfast parental blessing.” The children would all be listed by
name, as they accumulated, and I was there, too. I will note in this regard
that Makar Ivanovich was clever enough never to refer to “his honor the
most esteemed master Andrei Petrovich” as his “benefactor,” though he
invariably sent his humblest salutations, asking for his good favor and for
God’s blessing upon him. Replies were quickly sent to Makar Ivanovich by
my mother, and were always written in exactly the same vein. Versilov,
naturally, did not participate in this correspondence. Makar Ivanovich wrote
from various ends of Russia, from towns and monasteries, in which he
sometimes stayed for long stretches of time. He became what’s known as a
wanderer. He never asked for anything; on the other hand, about once every
three years he unfailingly came home for a while and stayed right at my
mother’s, who, as always happened, had her own apartment separate from
Versilov’s apartment. I’ll have to speak about that later, but here I’ll only
note that Makar Ivanovich did not sprawl on a sofa in the drawing room,
but modestly settled somewhere behind a partition. He never stayed long—
five days, a week.
I forgot to say that he was terribly fond and respectful of his last name,
“Dolgoruky.” Naturally, that was ridiculously stupid. The stupidest thing
was that he liked his last name precisely because there were princes named
Dolgoruky. An odd notion, completely upside down.
If I said the whole family was always together, that was without me,
naturally. I was like an outcast and had been placed with other people
almost from birth. But there was no special intention here, it simply turned
out that way for some reason. When my mother gave birth to me, she was
still young and beautiful, and that meant he needed her, and a howling baby
would naturally have been a hindrance to everything, especially when
traveling. That’s why it happened that until I was twenty I saw almost
nothing of my mother, except for two or three fleeting occasions. It came

about not from my mother’s feelings, but from Versilov’s contempt for
people.

VII
NOW ABOUT SOMETHING quite different.
A month earlier, that is, a month before the nineteenth of September, in
Moscow, I decided to renounce them all and go into my own idea for good.
I set it down like that: “go into my own idea,” because this expression may
signify almost my whole main thought—what I live for in the world. Of
what this “my own idea” is, all too much will be said later. In the solitary
dreaming of my many years of Moscow life, it took shape in me, from the
sixth class of high school on, and since then has perhaps not left me for a
moment. It swallowed up my whole life. I lived in dreams even before that,
lived ever since childhood in a dreamlike realm of a certain hue; but with
the appearance of this main idea that swallowed up everything in me, my
dreams consolidated and all at once molded themselves into a certain form;
from stupid they became reasonable. School did not interfere with dreams;
nor did it interfere with the idea. I’ll add, however, that I did poorly in the
last year, whereas up to the seventh grade I had always been one of the first,
and it happened owing to the same idea, owing to a conclusion, maybe a
false one, that I drew from it. So it was not school that interfered with the
idea, but the idea that interfered with school. It also interfered with the
university. Having finished high school, I immediately intended not only to
break radically with everyone, but, if need be, even with the whole world,
though I was then only nineteen. I wrote to those I had to, through those I
had to, in Petersburg, saying they should leave me in peace for good, not
send me any more money for my keep, and, if possible, forget me entirely
(that is, naturally, in case they remembered me at all), and finally—that I
wouldn’t go to the university, “not for anything.” I was faced with an
irrefutable dilemma: either the university and further education, or postpone
putting the “idea” to work for another four years; I stood intrepidly for the
idea, for I was mathematically convinced. Versilov, my father, whom I had
seen only once in my life, for a moment, when I was only ten years old (and
who in that one moment had managed to impress me), Versilov, in answer

to my letter, which, incidentally, was not sent to him, summoned me to
Petersburg himself in a letter written with his own hand, promising me a
private post. This summons from a dry and proud man, contemptuous and
negligent in my regard, who until now, having produced me and thrown me
among strangers, not only did not know me at all, but never even repented
of it (who knows, maybe he had a vague and imprecise notion of my very
existence, because it turned out later that it was not he who paid for my
upkeep in Moscow but others), a summons from this man, I say, who so
suddenly remembered me and deigned to write to me in his own hand—this
summons enticed me and decided my fate. Strangely, one of the things I
liked in his little letter (one small page of small format) was that he didn’t
say a word about the university, did not ask me to alter my decision, did not
reproach me for not wanting to study, in short, did not produce any parental
folderol of that sort, as usually happens, and yet that was precisely bad on
his part, in the sense that it testified still more to his negligence about me. I
also decided to go because it didn’t interfere in the least with my main
dream: “I’ll see what comes of it,” I reasoned, “in any case, I’ll be
connected with him only for a time, maybe a very short time. But the
moment I see that this step, even if it’s conditional and small, still moves
me further away from the main thing, I’ll immediately break with them,
drop everything, and withdraw into my shell.” Precisely into a shell! “I’ll
hide in it like a turtle”—the comparison pleased me very much. “I won’t be
alone,” I went on calculating, going around in a fuddle all those last days in
Moscow, “I’ll never be alone now as I was for all those terrible years
before: I’ll have my idea with me, which I’ll never betray, even in the event
that I like them all there, and they give me happiness, and I live with them
for ten years!” It was this impression, I’ll note beforehand, it was precisely
this doubleness of my plans and aims, that was already determined in
Moscow and that never left me for a moment in Petersburg (for I don’t
know if there was a single day in Petersburg that I didn’t set up as my final
date for breaking with them and going away)—this doubleness, I say, was
also, it seems, one of the main reasons for my many imprudences
committed that year, many abominations, even many low acts and,
naturally, stupid ones.

Of course, a father had suddenly appeared, whom I had never had before.
This thought intoxicated me both while I was packing in Moscow and on
the train. The fact of a father was nothing, and I disliked tender feelings, but
this man did not want to know me and humiliated me, while all those years
I had dreamed long and hard of him (if one can say that about dreaming).
Each of my dreams since childhood had echoed with him, had hovered
around him, had in the final result come down to him. I don’t know whether
I hated or loved him, but he filled all my future, all my reckoning in life,
with himself—and that happened on its own, it went together with my
growing up.
Yet another powerful circumstance influenced my departure from
Moscow, yet another temptation, which even then, three months before
leaving (that is, when there had not yet been any mention of Petersburg),
made my heart heave and pound! I was also drawn into this unknown ocean
because I could enter it directly as the lord and master even of other
people’s destinies, and what people! But it was magnanimous and not
despotic feelings that seethed in me—I warn you beforehand, so there will
be no mistaking my words. Versilov might think (if he deigned to think
about me) that this was a little boy coming, a recent high-school student, an
adolescent, for whom the whole world was a marvel. And yet I already
knew all his innermost secrets and had a most important document on me,
for which (now I know it for certain) he would have given several years of
his life, if I had revealed the whole secret to him then. However, I notice
that I’m setting a lot of riddles. Feelings can’t be described without facts.
Besides, more than enough will be said about all that in its place; that’s why
I’ve taken up the pen. And to write this way is like raving or a cloud.

VIII
FINALLY, IN ORDER to go on definitively to the nineteenth, I’ll
meanwhile say briefly and, so to speak, in passing, that I found them all,
that is, Versilov, my mother, and my sister (whom I was seeing for the first
time in my life), in difficult circumstances, almost destitute or verging on
destitution. I had already learned of that in Moscow, but I had never
supposed what I saw. Ever since childhood I had been used to picturing this

man, this “future father of mine,” almost in some sort of halo, and couldn’t
imagine him otherwise than in the forefront everywhere. Versilov had never
lived in the same apartment with my mother, but had always rented a
separate one for her; he did it, of course, out of those mean “proprieties” of
theirs. But here they were all living together in the same wooden wing, in a
lane of the Semyonovsky quarter.4 All their things had been pawned, so that
I even gave my mother, in secret from Versilov, my secret sixty roubles.
Precisely secret, because I had saved them from my pocket money, the five
roubles a month allotted me, over the course of two years; the saving began
from the first day of my idea, and therefore Versilov was not to know even
a word of this money. I trembled over it.
This help was a mere drop. My mother worked, my sister also took in
sewing; Versilov lived idly, was capricious, and went on living with a great
many of his former, rather expensive habits. He grumbled terribly,
especially at dinner, and all his manners were completely despotic. But my
mother, my sister, Tatyana Pavlovna, and the whole family of the late
Andronikov (a certain department head, deceased three months earlier, who
at the time had managed Versilov’s affairs), which consisted of countless
women, stood in awe of him as of an idol. I could never have pictured such
a thing. I’ll note that nine years earlier he had been incomparably more
elegant. I’ve already said that he remained with some sort of halo in my
dreams, and therefore I could not imagine how it was possible to become so
aged and shabby only some nine years later: I at once felt sadness, pity,
shame. The sight of him was one of the most painful of my first impressions
on arrival. However, he was by no means an old man yet, he was only fortyfive; and as I studied him further, I found something even more striking in
his good looks than what had survived in my memory. There was less
brilliance than then, less of the external, even of the elegant, but it was as if
life had imprinted on his face something much more interesting than was
there before.
And yet destitution was only the tenth or twentieth part of his
misfortunes, and I knew it only too well. Besides destitution, there was
something immeasurably more serious—not to mention that there was still
hope of winning the litigation over an inheritance that Versilov had started a

year before against the Princes Sokolsky, and Versilov might receive in the
nearest future an estate worth seventy thousand and maybe a bit more. I’ve
already said above that this Versilov had run through three inheritances in
his life, and here he was going to be rescued again by an inheritance! The
case was to be decided in court in the shortest time. That was why I came.
True, no one gave out money on hope, there was nowhere to borrow, and
meanwhile they bore with it.
But Versilov did not go to anyone, though he sometimes left for the
whole day. Over a year ago, he had already been driven out of society. That
story, despite all my efforts, remained unclear to me in its main points,
despite my whole month of life in Petersburg. Was Versilov guilty or not—
that was what mattered to me, that was what I had come for! Everybody
turned away from him, including, by the way, all the influential nobility,
with whom he had been especially able to maintain relations all his life,
owing to rumors of a certain extremely low and—what’s worst of all in the
eyes of the “world”—scandalous act he was supposed to have committed
over a year before in Germany, and even of a slap in the face he had
received then, much too publicly, precisely from one of the Sokolsky
princes, and to which he had not responded with a challenge. Even his
children (the legitimate ones), his son and daughter, turned away from him
and lived separately. True, both the son and the daughter floated in the
highest circle, through the Fanariotovs and old Prince Sokolsky (Versilov’s
former friend). However, looking at him more closely during that whole
month, what I saw was an arrogant man, whom society had not excluded
from its circle, but rather who had himself driven society away from him—
so independent an air he had. But did he have the right to that air—that’s
what troubled me! I absolutely had to find out the whole truth in the very
shortest time, for I had come to judge this man. My own power I still
concealed from him, but I had either to acknowledge him, or to spurn him
altogether. And the latter would be all too painful for me, and I suffered. I’ll
finally make a full confession: this man was dear to me!
And meanwhile I lived in the same apartment with them, worked, and
barely refrained from being rude. In fact, I did not refrain. Having lived
with them for a month, I became more convinced every day that I simply

couldn’t turn to him for final explanations. The proud man stood right in
front of me as a riddle that insulted me deeply. He was even nice and
jocular with me, but I sooner wanted a quarrel than such jokes. All my
conversations with him always bore some sort of ambiguity in them, that is,
quite simply some strange mockery on his part. At the very beginning, he
did not meet me seriously when I came from Moscow. I could in no way
understand why he did that. True, he achieved the result that he remained
impenetrable to me; but I could not have lowered myself to beg for serious
treatment from him. And besides, he had astonishing and irresistible ways
about him, which I didn’t know how to deal with. In short, he treated me
like the greenest adolescent—something I was almost unable to bear,
though I knew it would be like that. Consequently, I myself stopped
speaking seriously and waited; I even almost stopped speaking entirely. I
was waiting for a certain person, on whose arrival in Petersburg I could
definitively learn the truth; in that lay my last hope. In any case, I was
prepared to break with him definitively and had already taken all the
measures. I pitied my mother, but . . . “either him or me”—that was what I
wanted to suggest to her and my sister. Even the day had been fixed; but
meanwhile I went to work.

Chapter Two
I
ON THAT NINETEENTH day of the month, I was also to receive my first
pay for the first month of my Petersburg service at my “private” post. They
never even asked me about this post, but simply sent me there, it seems, on
the very first day of my arrival. That was very crude, and I was almost
obliged to protest. The post turned out to be in the house of old Prince
Sokolsky. But to protest right then would have meant breaking with them at
once, which, though it didn’t frighten me at all, would have harmed my
essential aims, and therefore I accepted the post silently for the time being,
my silence protecting my dignity. I’ll explain from the outset that this
Prince Sokolsky, a rich man and a privy councillor,5 was in no way related
to those Princes Sokolsky from Moscow (impoverished wretches for several
generations in a row) with whom Versilov had his lawsuit. They were
merely namesakes. Nevertheless, the old prince took great interest in them
and especially liked one of these princes, the head of the family, so to speak
—a young officer. Still recently, Versilov had had enormous influence on
this old man’s affairs and had been his friend, a strange friend, because the
poor prince, as I noticed, was terribly afraid of him, not only at the time
when I entered, but, it seems, throughout their friendship. However, they
hadn’t seen each other for a long time; the dishonorable act Versilov was
accused of concerned precisely the prince’s family; but Tatyana Pavlovna
turned up, and it was through her mediation that I was placed with the old
man, who wanted to have “a young man” in his office. It so happened that
he also wanted terribly much to do Versilov a good turn, to make, so to
speak, a first step, and Versilov allowed it. The old prince made the
arrangements in the absence of his daughter, a general’s widow, who
probably would not have allowed him this step. Of that later, but I’ll note
that it was this strangeness of his relations with Versilov that struck me in
his favor. It stood to reason that if the head of the insulted family still went
on respecting Versilov, it meant that the rumor spread about Versilov’s

baseness was absurd or at least ambiguous. It was partly this circumstance
that forced me not to protest at taking the post: in taking it, I precisely
hoped to verify all that.
This Tatyana Pavlovna played a strange role at the time when I found her
in Petersburg. I had almost forgotten about her entirely and had never
expected that she had such significance. Previously, she had come my way
three or four times in my Moscow life, appearing from God knows where,
on somebody’s instructions, each time I had to be settled somewhere—on
entering Touchard’s little boarding school,6 or two and a half years later,
when I was transferred to high school and lodged in the quarters of the
unforgettable Nikolai Semyonovich. Having appeared, she’d spend the
whole day with me, inspecting my linen, my clothes, drive with me to
Kuznetsky and downtown, buy me everything I needed, in short, set up my
whole trousseau to the last little box and penknife; and she would hiss at me
all the while, scold me, reprimand me, quiz me, hold up to me the example
of some other fantastic boys, her acquaintances and relations, who
supposedly were all better than I was, and, really, she even pinched me and
positively shoved me, even several times, and painfully. Once she had
settled me and installed me in place, she would vanish without a trace for
several years. So it was she who, just as I arrived, appeared and got me
installed again. She was a small, dry little figure, with a sharp, birdlike little
nose and sharp, birdlike little eyes. She served Versilov like a slave, and
bowed down to him as to a pope, but out of conviction. But I soon noticed
with astonishment that she was decidedly respected by everyone and
everywhere, and, above all—decidedly everywhere and everyone knew her.
Old Prince Sokolsky treated her with extraordinary deference; so did his
family; so did those proud Versilov children; so did the Fanariotovs—and
yet she lived by doing sewing, washing some sort of lace, taking work from
a shop. She and I quarreled from the first word, because she decided to hiss
at me at once, as she had done six years before; after that we kept
quarreling every day; but that did not prevent us from talking occasionally,
and, I confess, by the end of the month I began to like her—for the
independence of her character, I suppose. However, I did not inform her of
that.

I understood at once that I had been assigned a post with this ailing old
man solely in order to “amuse” him, and that the whole job lay in that.
Naturally, that humiliated me, and I was going to take measures at once; but
soon afterwards the old eccentric produced a sort of unexpected impression
in me, something like pity, and by the end of the month I grew somehow
strangely attached to him, or at least I dropped my intention to be rude. He
was, incidentally, no more than sixty. Here a whole story came out. A year
and a half earlier he had suddenly had a fit; he had gone somewhere and
had lost his mind on the way, so that something like a scandal had occurred,
which was talked about in Petersburg. As is proper in such cases, he was
immediately taken abroad, but about five months later he suddenly
reappeared, and in perfect health, though he did leave government service.
Versilov maintained seriously (and with notable warmth) that there was no
insanity involved, but merely some sort of nervous fit. I immediately
noticed this warmth of Versilov’s. However, I will note that I myself all but
shared his opinion. The old man just seemed awfully light-minded at times,
which didn’t go with his years, and they said he hadn’t been that way at all
before. They said that before he had been some sort of adviser somewhere
and had once somehow distinguished himself greatly in some mission he
had been charged with. Having known him for a whole month, I would
never have supposed any special ability in him for being an adviser. They
noticed (though I did not) that after his fit a sort of special inclination
developed in him to get married quickly, and that he supposedly set about
this idea more than once in that year and a half. This was supposedly known
in society, and was of interest to the right people. But since this impulse
was far too discordant with the interests of certain persons around the
prince, the old man was watched on all sides. His own family was small; he
had been a widower for twenty years and had only one daughter, the
general’s widow, who was now expected any day from Moscow, a young
person whose character he unquestionably feared. But he had no end of
various distant relations, mostly on his deceased wife’s side, who were all
but destitute; besides, there was a multitude of various wards, male and
female, who received his benefactions, and who all expected a share of his
inheritance, and so they all assisted the general’s widow in supervising the
old man. On top of that, ever since he was a young man, he had had a
certain quirk—only I don’t know whether it was ridiculous or not—of

marrying off impoverished girls. He had been marrying them off for
twentyfive years on end—distant relations, or stepdaughters of his wife’s
cousins, or his goddaughters; he even married off his doorkeeper’s
daughter. He started by taking them into his house while they were still
little girls, brought them up with governesses and French-women, then
educated them in the best schools, and in the end gave them away with a
dowry. All this constantly crowded around him. The wards, naturally, once
they married, would produce more girls, all the girls thus produced also
aimed at becoming wards, he had to go everywhere to baptisms, all this
showed up with congratulations on his birthdays, and he found it all
extremely agreeable.
On entering his service, I noticed at once that a certain painful conviction
had nested in the old man’s mind—and it was quite impossible not to notice
it—that everyone in society had supposedly begun to look at him strangely,
that everyone had supposedly begun to treat him differently than before,
when he had been in good health; this impression did not leave him even in
the merriest social gatherings. The old man became insecure, began
noticing something in everyone’s eyes. The thought that he was still
suspected of insanity obviously tormented him; even me he sometimes
studied with mistrust. And if he had learned that someone was spreading or
maintaining this rumor about him, I believe this gentlest of men would have
become his eternal enemy. It is this circumstance that I ask you to take note
of. I will add that this also decided me from the first day not to be rude to
him; I was even glad if I sometimes had the chance to cheer him up or
divert him; I don’t think this confession can cast a shadow on my dignity.
The greater part of his money was invested. After his illness, he had
joined a big shareholding company, a very solid one, by the way. And
though the business was conducted by the others, he was also very
interested in it, came to the shareholders’ meetings, was elected a founding
member, sat on the board, delivered long speeches, refuted, made noise, all
with obvious pleasure. He very much liked making speeches: at least
everyone could see his intelligence. And in general he began to be terribly
fond of inserting especially profound things and bons mots into his
conversation, even in his most intimate private life; that I understand only

too well. In his house, downstairs, something like a home office was set up,
and a clerk took care of the business, the accounts, and the bookkeeping,
and also managed the household. This clerk, who served, besides, in a
government post, would have been quite enough by himself; but, at the
wish of the prince, they added me as well, as if to assist the clerk; but I was
transferred at once to the study and often had no work in front of me, no
papers, no books, not even for pretense.
I’m writing now like a man who has long since sobered up, and in many
respects almost like an outsider; but how shall I depict my sadness of that
time (which I vividly recall right now), as it lodged itself in my heart, and,
above all, my agitation of that time, which would reach such a troubled and
fervid state that I even didn’t sleep at night—from my impatience, from the
riddles that I set myself.

II
ASKING FOR MONEY is a vile affair, even when it’s your salary, if you
feel somewhere in the folds of your conscience that you haven’t quite
earned it. Meanwhile, the day before, my mother and sister were whispering
together, in secret from Versilov (“so as not to upset Andrei Petrovich”),
intending to go to a pawnshop with an icon from her icon stand, which for
some reason was very dear to her. I was working for fifty roubles a month,
but I had no idea how I would receive it; when I was appointed here,
nobody told me anything. Some three days earlier, meeting the clerk
downstairs, I had asked him who was responsible for the salaries here. The
man looked at me with the smile of one astonished (he didn’t like me):
“But do you get a salary?”
I thought that right after my reply he would add:
“And what for, sir?”
But he only answered drily that he “knew nothing” and buried himself in
his ruled notebook, in which he was copying out accounts from some scraps

of paper.
He was not unaware, however, that I did do something. Two weeks
earlier I had sat for exactly four days over a job he himself had given me,
making a copy from a rough draft, and it had almost come down to
rewriting it. It was a whole crowd of the prince’s “thoughts,” which he had
prepared to submit to the shareholders’ committee. I had to put it together
into a whole and touch up the style. Afterwards I spent a whole day sitting
over this paper with the prince, and he argued with me very vehemently,
though he remained pleased; only I don’t know whether he submitted the
paper or not. I won’t even mention the two or three letters, also on business,
which I wrote at his request.
It was also vexing for me to ask for my salary, because I had already
decided to give up my position, anticipating that I’d be forced to leave here
as well, owing to ineluctable circumstances. Waking up that morning and
getting dressed upstairs in my little closet, I felt my heart pound, and though
I spat as I entered the prince’s house, I again felt the same agitation: that
morning the person was to arrive here, the woman from whose arrival I
expected an explanation of all that tormented me! This was precisely the
prince’s daughter, General Akhmakov’s widow, the young woman of whom
I have already spoken and who was at bitter enmity with Versilov. At last
I’ve written that name! Of course, I had never seen her, and could not
imagine how I would speak to her, or whether I would; but I imagined to
myself (perhaps on sufficient grounds) that her arrival would disperse the
darkness that surrounded Versilov in my eyes. I couldn’t remain firm: it was
terribly vexing that from the very first step I was so pusillanimous and
awkward; it was terribly curious, and above all disgusting—three full
impressions. I remember that whole day by heart!
My prince knew nothing as yet about the probable arrival of his daughter,
and assumed she would return from Moscow maybe in a week. But I
learned of it the evening before, quite by accident: Tatyana Pavlovna, who
had received a letter from the general’s widow, let it slip to my mother in
my presence. Though they whispered and used remote phrases, I guessed it.
Of course, I wasn’t eavesdropping; I simply couldn’t help listening when I

saw my mother suddenly become so agitated at the news of this woman’s
arrival. Versilov was not at home.
I didn’t want to inform the old man of it, because I couldn’t help noticing
in all that time how afraid he was of her coming. He had even let slip three
days earlier, though timidly and remotely, that he was afraid of her coming
on account of me—that is, that on account of me he would get a scolding. I
must add, however, that in family relations he still maintained his
independence and domination, especially in managing money. My first
conclusion about him was that he was a real woman; but then I had to reconclude, in the sense that, even if he was a woman, all the same there
remained in him at times a sort of stubbornness, if not real courage. There
were moments when it was almost impossible to do anything with his
apparently cowardly and susceptible character. Versilov explained it to me
later in more detail. I mention now, with curiosity, that he and I hardly ever
spoke of the general’s widow—that is, avoided speaking, as it were; I
especially avoided it, and he in turn avoided speaking of Versilov, and I
surmised at once that he wouldn’t answer me, if I were to ask any of the
ticklish questions that interested me so much.
If anyone wants to know what we talked about during that whole month,
I will reply that, essentially, it was about everything in the world, but all of
it somehow strange. I very much liked the extreme artlessness with which
he treated me. I sometimes studied the man with extreme perplexity, asking
myself, “Where was he sitting before? He’s just right for our high school,
and for the fourth class at that—he’d make the nicest schoolmate.” I also
wondered more than once at his face: it looked extremely serious (almost
handsome) and dry; thick, gray, curly hair, an open gaze; and his whole
figure was lean, of a good height; but his face had a sort of unpleasant,
almost indecent property of changing suddenly from the extraordinarily
serious to the much-too-playful, so that someone seeing it for the first time
would never expect it. I spoke of it with Versilov, who heard me out with
curiosity; it seemed he hadn’t expected me to be able to make such
observations; yet he observed in passing that this property had appeared in
the prince after his illness and maybe only quite recently.

We talked for the most part about two abstract subjects: about God and
his being—that is, whether he exists or not—and about women. The prince
was very religious and sentimental. In his office hung an enormous icon
case with an icon lamp. But something would come over him—and he’d
suddenly begin to doubt God’s existence and say astonishing things,
obviously challenging me to reply. My attitude to this idea was rather
indifferent, generally speaking, but even so the two of us would get carried
away, and always sincerely. Generally, even now I recall all those
conversations with pleasure. But the sweetest thing of all for him was to
chat about women, and since I, given my dislike of conversations on that
topic, could not be a good interlocutor, he would sometimes even get upset.
He had just begun talking in this vein as I came in that morning. I found
him in a playful mood, while the previous evening I had left him extremely
sad for some reason. Yet I absolutely had to be done that day with the
matter of my salary—before the arrival of certain persons. I calculated that
we would be interrupted that day without fail (not for nothing was my heart
pounding)—and then perhaps I wouldn’t venture to talk about money. But
since one couldn’t just start talking about money, I naturally got angry at
my own stupidity and, as I remember it now, vexed at some much-toomerry question he asked me, I fired all my views of women at him at once,
and that with extreme ardor. But the result was that he got still more carried
away, worse luck for me.

III
“ . . . I DON’T LIKE WOMEN, because they’re rude, because they’re
awkward, because they’re not independent, and because they wear indecent
clothes,” I concluded my lengthy tirade incoherently.
“Have mercy, dear heart!” he cried, terribly amused, which made me still
angrier.
I’m yielding and trifling only in trifles, but I will never yield in the main
thing. In trifles, in certain social manners, one can do God knows what with
me, and I’ve always cursed this trait in myself. Out of some stinking good

naturedness, I have sometimes been ready to yes even some society fop,
seduced solely by his courtesy, or to get into an argument with a fool, which
is most unpardonable. All from lack of self-control and from having grown
up in a corner. You go away angry and swearing that tomorrow it won’t be
repeated, but tomorrow the same thing happens again. That’s why I’ve
sometimes been taken almost for a sixteen-year-old. But instead of
acquiring self-control, I prefer even now to shut myself up still more in a
corner, though it be in the most misanthropic way: “Maybe I’m awkward,
but—farewell!” I say that seriously and forever. However, I am by no
means writing this apropos of the prince, and not even apropos of our
conversation that time.
“I am by no means saying it for your amusement,” I almost shouted at
him, “I am simply voicing a conviction.”
“But how is it that women are rude and indecently dressed? That’s
novel.”
“They’re rude. Go to the theater, go for a promenade. Every man knows
the right side, they come towards each other and pass each other, he on the
right and I on the right. A woman, that is, a lady—I’m speaking of ladies—
comes stomping straight at you, without even noticing you, as if it were
your unfailing duty to jump aside and yield her the way. I’m ready to yield,
as to a weaker being, but why is it her right, why is she so sure I must do it
—that’s what’s offensive! I always spit when I run into them. And after that
they cry that they’re humiliated and demand equality; what kind of equality
is it, if she tramples me down or stuffs my mouth full of sand!”
“Sand!”
“Yes. Because they’re indecently dressed; only a depraved man can fail
to notice that. They shut the doors in courts when a case gets to indecency;
why then do they allow it in the streets, where there are a lot more people?
They pad themselves quite openly with some frou-frou behind, to show that
they’re belles-femmes. Openly! I can’t help noticing it, and any young man
will notice it, and a child, a beginning little boy, will also notice it. It’s base.

Let old philanderers admire it and run after them with their tongues hanging
out, but there are pure young people who must be protected. The only thing
left to do is spit. She goes down the boulevard and leaves a four-foot train
behind her sweeping the dust; how about the one behind her: you either
have to run ahead or jump aside, otherwise she’ll stuff five pounds of sand
in your nose and mouth. Besides, it’s silk, and she frays it on the stones for
three miles, just for the sake of fashion, and her husband earns five hundred
roubles a year in the Senate:7 there’s where the bribes are sitting! I always
spit on it, I spit and berate them out loud.”
Though I’m writing down this conversation somewhat humorously here,
and in a way characteristic of me then, the thinking is still mine.
“And get away with it?” the prince became curious.
“I spit and walk away. Naturally, she feels it, but she doesn’t let it show,
she stomps on majestically without turning her head. And there was only
one time that I berated a couple of them quite seriously, both with trains, on
the boulevard—naturally, not in nasty words, I merely observed out loud
that trains were offensive.”
“That’s how you put it?”
“Of course. First, she’s trampling on social conventions, and second,
she’s raising dust; and the boulevard is for everybody: I walk there, another
person walks there, a third, Fyodor, Ivan, it makes no difference. So I spoke
it all out. And generally I don’t like the female gait, if you look from
behind; I spoke that out, too, but in a hint.”
“My friend, you could have gotten into a serious incident: they could
have dragged you to the justice of the peace!”
“They could have done nothing at all. There were no grounds for
complaint: a man walks by and talks to himself. Every man has the right to
voice his conviction into the air. I was speaking abstractly, I wasn’t
addressing them. They themselves did the pestering: they started berating
me, they were much nastier than I was: milksop, ought to go without dinner,

nihilist, hand him over to the police, and that I started pestering them
because they were alone and weak women, and that if there had been a man
with them, I’d have put my tail between my legs at once. I told them coolly
that they should stop bothering me, and that I would cross to the other side.
And in order to prove to them that I’m not afraid of their men and am ready
to accept their challenge, I will follow twenty steps behind them right to
their house, then stand in front of their house and wait for their men. And so
I did.”
“Really?”
“Of course, it was stupid, but I was worked up. They dragged me for over
three miles, in hot weather, as far as the institutes, went into a one-story
wooden house—quite a decent one, I must admit—and you could see lots of
flowers inside, two canaries, three lapdogs, and some framed prints. I stood
in the middle of the street in front of the house for about half an hour. They
peeked out on the sly three times or so, and then drew all the blinds. Finally,
an official came out of the gate, an elderly man; judging by his looks, he
had been asleep and had been awakened on purpose; he was wearing, not
quite a house robe, but something very informal; he stood by the gate, put
his hands behind his back, and started looking at me, and I at him. He
would glance away, then look at me again, and suddenly he began to smile
at me. I turned around and left.”
“My friend, this is something Schilleresque!8 It has always surprised me:
you’ve got ruddy cheeks, your face is bursting with health, and—such a,
one might say, aversion to women! How is it possible that at your age a
woman does not make a certain impression? When I was just eleven, mon
cher, my tutor observed to me that I gazed too much at the statues in the
Summer Garden.”9 “You’d like terribly for me to go and visit some local
Josephine and come to let you know. There’s no need. I myself, when I was
just thirteen, saw a woman’s nakedness, all of it; since then I’ve felt this
loathing.”
“Seriously? But, cher enfant, a beautiful, fresh woman smells just like an
apple, what’s there to loathe?”

“In my former little boarding school, at Touchard’s, even before high
school, I had a comrade—Lambert. He used to beat me, because he was
more than three years older, and I served him and took his boots off. When
he went to confirmation, the abbé Rigaud visited him to congratulate him
on his first communion,10 and the two rushed in tears to embrace each
other, and the abbé Rigaud started pressing him to his breast terribly hard,
with various gestures. I also wept and was very envious. When his father
died, he left school, and I didn’t see him for two years, but after two years I
met him in the street. He said he would come to see me. I was already in
high school and was living with Nikolai Semyonovich. He came in the
morning, showed me five hundred roubles, and told me to come with him.
Though he had beaten me two years earlier, he had always needed me, not
only for his boots; he used to tell me everything. He told me that he had
stolen the money that day from his mother’s cashbox, having duplicated the
key, because his father’s money was all his by law, and she dared not keep
it from him, and that the abbé Rigaud had come the day before to admonish
him—came in, stood over him and started whimpering, portraying horror,
and raising his arms to the sky, “and I pulled my knife and said I’d cut his
throat ” (he pronounced it thghroat). We drove to Kuznetsky. On the way,
he told me that his mother had relations with the abbé Rigaud, and that he
had noticed it, and that he spat on it all, and that everything they said about
communion was rubbish. He said a lot more, and I was frightened. In
Kuznetsky he bought a double-barreled shotgun, a game bag, cartridges, a
horsewhip, and then also a pound of candy. We drove out of town to shoot,
and on our way met a birdcatcher with his cages; Lambert bought a canary
from him. In the woods he let the canary out, because it couldn’t fly far
after being in a cage, and began shooting at it, but missed. It was the first
time in his life he had shot a gun, but he had been wanting to buy a gun for
a long time, still at Touchard’s, and we had long dreamed of a gun. He was
as if spluttering. His hair was terribly black, his face white and red-cheeked
like a mask, his nose long and aquiline, such as Frenchmen have, his teeth
white, his eyes black. He tied the canary to a branch with a thread, and with
both barrels, point-blank, from four inches away, blasted it twice, and it
scattered into a hundred little feathers. Then we went back, stopped at a
hotel, took a room, began eating and drinking champagne; a lady came . . . I

was very struck, I remember, by how magnificently she was dressed, in
green silk. Here I saw all that . . . what I told you about . . . Afterwards,
when we started drinking again, he began to taunt her and abuse her; she
was sitting there without her dress; he had taken her dress away, and when
she began cursing and asking for her dress, so that she could put it on, he
started whipping her as hard as he could on her bare shoulders with the
whip. I stood up and seized him by the hair, so deftly that I threw him to the
floor at once. He seized a fork and stuck it into my thigh. Then people
rushed in, hearing the shouting, and I managed to escape. Since then the
memory of nakedness has been loathsome to me; believe me, she was a
beauty.”
As I talked, the prince’s face changed from playful to very sad.
“Mon pauvre enfant! 4 I’ve always been convinced that there were a great
many unhappy days in your childhood.”
“Please don’t worry.”
“But you were alone, you told me so yourself, though there was this
Lambert. The way you described it: the canary, the confirmation with tears
on each other’s breasts, and then, after a year or so, he speaks of his mother
and this abbot . . . O, mon cher, this children question of our time is simply
frightful: while these little golden heads, with their curls and innocence, in
their earliest childhood, flutter before you and look at you with their bright
laughter and bright little eyes—they’re like God’s angels or lovely little
birds; but later . . . but later it so happens that it would be better for them
not to grow up at all!”
“How unnerved you are, Prince! As if you had children yourself. You
don’t have children and never will.”
“Tiens!”5 His face changed instantly. “In fact, Alexandra Petrovna—the
day before yesterday, heh, heh!—Alexandra Petrovna Sinitsky—I think you
must have met her here about three weeks ago—imagine, suddenly, the day
before yesterday, to my cheerful remark that if I marry now, at least I can

rest assured that I won’t have children—suddenly she says to me, and even
with a sort of spite, ‘On the contrary, you precisely will, such a one as you
will unfailingly have children, even in the very first year, you’ll see.’ Heh,
heh! And everybody imagined for some reason that I’d suddenly get
married; but, though it’s spiteful, you must agree it’s witty.”
“Witty, but offensive.”
“Well, cher enfant, one cannot be offended by just anybody. What I
appreciate most of all in people is wittiness, which is evidently
disappearing, and what Alexandra Petrovna is going to say—who can take
that into account!”
“What, what did you say?” I latched on. “Not by just anybody . . .
precisely so! Not everybody’s worth paying attention to—an excellent rule!
That is precisely what I need. I’ll write it down. You occasionally say the
nicest things, Prince.”
He beamed all over.
“N’est-ce pas?6 Cher enfant, true wit is disappearing more and more. Eh,
mais . . . C’est moi qui connais les femmes.7 Believe me, every woman’s
life, whatever she may preach, is an eternal search for someone to submit to
. . . a thirst for submission, so to speak. And note—without a single
exception.”
“Perfectly true, splendid!” I cried in delight. At another time we would
have launched at once into philosophical reflections on the subject, for a
whole hour, but it was as if something suddenly bit me, and I blushed all
over. I imagined that, by praising his bons mots, I was sucking up to him on
account of the money, and that he would be sure to think of that when I
began to ask. I mention it now on purpose.
“Prince, I humbly request that you pay me right now the fifty roubles you
owe me for this month,” I blurted out all at once, irritated to the point of
rudeness.

I remember (just as I remember that whole morning in minute detail) that
a scene then took place between us that was most vile in its real truth. At
first he didn’t understand me, looked for a long time and did not understand
what money I was talking about. It was only natural that he never imagined
I should receive a salary—and what for? True, he started assuring me later
that he had forgotten, and, when he grasped it, he instantly started taking
out the fifty roubles, but he became hurried and even turned red. Seeing
how things were, I stood up and declared sharply that I could not accept the
money now, that I had obviously been told of the salary either mistakenly or
deceitfully, so that I would not reject the post, and that I now understood
only too well that I had no reason to be paid, because there wasn’t any
work. The prince became frightened and started assuring me that I had
worked terribly much, and that I would have still more work, and that fifty
roubles was so insignificant that he, on the contrary, would increase it,
because it was his duty, and that he himself had negotiated with Tatyana
Pavlovna, but had “unpardonably forgotten all about it.” I flared up and
announced definitively that it would be mean of me to receive a salary for
scandalous stories of how I had accompanied two trains to the institutes,
that I had not been hired to amuse him, but to occupy myself with business,
but since there was no business, it must be terminated, etc., etc. I couldn’t
even have imagined that it was possible to be as frightened as he was after
these words of mine. Naturally, the end was that I stopped objecting, and he
did stick me with the fifty roubles: to this day I blush to recall that I
accepted it! Things always end in meanness in this world, and, worst of all,
he almost managed to convince me then that I had unquestionably earned it,
and I had the foolishness to believe it, and with that it was somehow
decidedly impossible not to take it.
“Cher, cher enfant! ” he exclaimed, kissing and embracing me (I confess,
I myself was about to weep, devil knows why, though I instantly restrained
myself, and even now, as I write, color comes to my face). “Dear friend,
you’re now like one of my own; in this month you’ve become like a piece
of my own heart! In ‘society’ there is only ‘society’ and nothing more;
Katerina Nikolaevna” (his daughter) “is a brilliant woman, and I’m proud
of it, but she often offends me, my dear, very, very often . . . Well, and these
girls (elles sont charmantes8) and their mothers, who come on birthdays—

they only bring their embroidery, but they don’t know how to say anything.
I’ve accumulated sixty pillows with their embroidery, all dogs and deer. I
love them very much, but with you I’m almost as if with my own—and not
with a son, but a brother, and I especially like it when you object; you’re
literary, you’ve read, you know how to admire . . .”
“I’ve read nothing and am not literary at all. I’ve read whatever happened
along, but in the past two years I haven’t read at all and don’t intend to.”
“Why not?”
“I have other goals.”
“Cher . . . it’s a pity to say at the end of your life, as I do, je sais tout,
mais je ne sais rien de bon.9 I decidedly do not know why I’ve lived in the
world! But . . . I owe you so much . . . and I even wanted . . .”
He broke off somehow suddenly, went limp, and became pensive. After a
shock (and with him the shocks could come every other minute, God knows
why), he usually seemed to lose his good sense for a while and be unable to
control himself; however, he would soon put himself to rights, so it was all
harmless. We sat for a minute. His lower lip, which was very thick, hung
down . . . Most of all, I was surprised that he had suddenly mentioned his
daughter, and with such candor. Of course, I ascribed it to his being upset.
“Cher enfant, you’re not angry that I address you familiarly, are you?”
suddenly escaped him.
“Not in the least. I confess, in the beginning, the first few times, I was
slightly offended and also wanted to address you familiarly, but I saw it was
stupid, because you surely don’t do it to humiliate me.”
He was no longer listening and had forgotten his question.
“Well, how’s your father?” he suddenly raised his pensive eyes to me.

I simply jumped. First, he had designated Versilov as my father—
something he had never allowed himself with me; and, second, he had
begun speaking of Versilov, something that had never happened before.
“Sits without money and mopes,” I replied briefly, burning with curiosity
myself.
“Yes, about money. Their case is to be decided today in the district court,
and I’m waiting for Prince Seryozha and what he’ll come with. He
promised to come to me straight from court. Their whole destiny is
involved; it’s sixty or eighty thousand. Of course, I’ve also always wished
the best for Andrei Petrovich” (Versilov, that is), “and it seems he’ll come
out the winner and the princes will be left with nothing. Law!”
“In court today?” I exclaimed, struck.
The thought that Versilov had neglected to inform me even of that struck
me in the extreme. “That means he said nothing to mother, or maybe to
anybody,” it occurred to me all at once. “What character!
“And is Prince Sokolsky in Petersburg?” another thought suddenly struck
me.
“Since yesterday. Straight from Berlin, especially for this day.”
Another extremely important piece of news for me. “And he’ll come here
today, this man who gave him a slap!”
“Well, what of it?” The prince’s whole face suddenly changed. “He still
preaches God as he used to, and, and . . . maybe still goes after the girls,
after unfledged little girls? Heh, heh! Right now, too, there’s a most
amusing anecdote hatching . . . Heh, heh!”
“Who preaches? Who goes after the girls?”
“Andrei Petrovich! Would you believe, he pestered us all back then like a
burr—what do we eat, what do we think?—or almost like that. Frightened

us and purified us: ‘If you’re religious, why don’t you go and become a
monk?’ He demanded almost that. Mais quelle idée!10 Even if it’s right,
isn’t it too severe? It was me especially that he liked to frighten with the
Last Judgment, me of all people.”
“I haven’t noticed any of that, and I’ve lived with him for a month now,”
I replied, listening impatiently. It was terribly vexing that he hadn’t quite
come to his senses and mumbled so incoherently.
“He just doesn’t say it now, but, believe me, it’s so. The man is clever,
indisputably, and deeply educated; but is that the right kind of intelligence?
It all happened to him after his three years abroad. And, I confess, he
shocked me very much . . . he shocked everybody . . . Cher enfant, j’aime le
bon Dieu11 . . . I believe, I believe as much as I can, but—I was certainly
beside myself then. Suppose I used a frivolous method, but I did it on
purpose, in vexation—and besides, the essence of my objection was as
serious as it has been from the beginning of the world: ‘If there is a supreme
being,’ I say to him, ‘and it exists personally, and not in the form of some
sort of spirit poured over creation in the form of a liquid or whatever
(because that is still more difficult to understand)—where, then, does it
live?’ My friend, c’était bête,12 undoubtedly, but that’s what all objections
boil down to. Un domicile13; is an important matter. He was terribly angry.
He converted to Catholicism there.”
“I’ve also heard about that idea. Nonsense, surely.”
“I assure you by all that’s holy. Look at him well . . . However, you say
he’s changed. Well, but at that time he tormented us all so! Would you
believe, he behaved as if he were a saint and his relics were about to be
revealed.11 He demanded an account of our behavior from us, I swear to
you! Relics! En voilà une autre! 14 Well, let him be a monk or an anchorite
—but here’s a man going around in a tailcoat and all the rest . . . and then
suddenly—his relics! A strange wish for a man of the world and, I confess,
a strange taste. I don’t say anything about it: of course, it’s all holy, and
anything can happen . . . Besides, it’s all de l’inconnu,15 but for a man of
the world it’s even indecent. If it should somehow happen to me, or they

should offer it to me, I swear I’d refuse. Why, suddenly I’m dining today in
a club, and then suddenly—I reveal myself! No, I’d be a laughing-stock! I
told him all that then . . . He wore chains.”12
I turned red with anger.
“Did you see the chains yourself ?”
“I didn’t myself, but . . .”
“Then I declare to you that it’s all a lie, a tissue of vile machinations and
enemy slander, that is, of one enemy, the chiefest and most inhuman one,
because he has only one enemy—your daughter!”
The prince flushed in his turn.
“Mon cher, I beg you and I insist that in the future my daughter’s name
never be mentioned again in my presence together with this vile story.”
I rose slightly. He was beside himself; his chin was trembling.
“Cette histoire infâme!16 . . . I didn’t believe it, I never wanted to believe
it, but . . . they tell me: believe it, believe it, I . . .”
Here the valet suddenly came in again and announced a visitor. I sank
back down on my chair.

IV
TWO LADIES CAME in, both young, one the stepdaughter of one of the
cousins of the prince’s late wife, or something of the sort, his ward, for
whom he had already allotted a dowry, and who (I note it for the future) had
money of her own; the other was Anna Andreevna Versilov, Versilov’s
daughter, three years older than I, who lived with her brother at Mme.
Fanariotov’s and whom before then I had seen only once in my life,
fleetingly in the street, though I had already had a skirmish with her brother,
also fleetingly, in Moscow (quite possibly I’ll mention that skirmish later

on, if there’s room, though essentially it’s not worth it). This Anna
Andreevna had been a special favorite of the prince’s since childhood
(Versilov’s acquaintance with the prince began terribly long ago). I was so
embarrassed by what had just transpired that I didn’t even stand up when
they came in, though the prince stood up to meet them; and afterwards I
thought it embarrassing to stand up, and remained in my place. Above all, I
was thrown off, because the prince had been shouting at me just three
minutes before, and I still didn’t know whether I should leave or not. But
my old man had already forgotten everything completely, as was his wont,
and was all pleasantly animated at the sight of the girls. He even managed,
with a quick change of physiognomy and a sort of mysterious wink, to
whisper to me hastily, just before they came in:
“Take a look at Olympiada, look closely, closely . . . I’ll tell you later . .
.”
I looked at her quite closely and found nothing special: not a very tall
girl, plump, and with extremely ruddy cheeks. Her face, however, was
rather pleasant, the kind that the materialists like. Her expression was kind,
perhaps, but with a wrinkle. She could not have been especially brilliant
intellectually, at least not in a higher sense, but one could see cunning in her
eyes. No more than nineteen years old. In short, nothing remarkable. We’d
have called her a “pillow” in high school. (If I describe her in such detail,
it’s solely because I’ll need it in the future.)
By the way, everything I’ve been describing so far, with such apparently
unnecessary detail, all leads to the future and will be needed there. It will all
echo in its own place: I’ve been unable to avoid it; and if it’s boring, I beg
you not to read it.
Versilov’s daughter was quite a different sort of person. Tall, even
slightly lean; an elongated and remarkably pale face, but black, fluffy hair;
big, dark eyes, a profound gaze; small and red lips, a fresh mouth. The first
woman whose gait did not fill me with loathing; however, she was thin and
lean. The expression of her face was not entirely kind, but imposing;
twenty-two years old. Hardly a single external feature resembling Versilov,

and yet, by some miracle, an extraordinary resemblance to him in her facial
expression. I don’t know if she was good-looking; that’s a matter of taste.
Both women were dressed very modestly, so it’s not worth describing. I
expected to be offended at once by some look or gesture from Miss
Versilov, and I prepared myself; for her brother had offended me in
Moscow, at our very first confrontation in life. She couldn’t have known me
by my face, but she had certainly heard that I visited the prince. Everything
the prince proposed or did aroused interest and was an event among that
whole heap of his relations and “expectant ones”—the more so his sudden
partiality for me. I knew positively that the prince was very interested in the
fate of Anna Andreevna and was seeking a fiancé for her. But it was more
difficult to find a fiancé for Miss Versilov than for the ones who
embroidered on canvas.
And so, contrary to all expectation, Miss Versilov, having shaken the
prince’s hand and exchanged some cheerful social phrases with him, looked
at me with extraordinary curiosity and, seeing that I was also looking at her,
suddenly bowed to me with a smile. True, she had just walked in and her
bow was in greeting, but her smile was so kind that it was obviously
deliberate. And I recall that I experienced an extraordinarily pleasant
feeling.
“And this . . . this is my dear and young friend Arkady Andreevich Dol . .
.”—the prince murmured, noticing that she had bowed to me, while I was
still sitting—and suddenly broke off: perhaps he became embarrassed that
he was introducing me to her (that is, essentially, a brother to a sister). The
pillow also gave me a bow; but I suddenly flew into a stupid rage and
jumped up from my seat: a surge of affected pride, completely senseless, all
from self-love!
“Excuse me, Prince, I am not Arkady Andreevich, but Arkady
Makarovich,” I cut off cuttingly, quite forgetting that I ought to have
responded to the ladies’ bows. Devil take that indecent moment!
“Mais . . . tiens! ” the prince cried out, striking himself on the forehead
with his finger.

“Where did you study?” I heard beside me the silly and drawn-out
question of the pillow, who had come over to me.
“In a high school in Moscow.”
“Ah! So I heard. And do they teach well there?”
“Very well.”
I went on standing, and spoke like a soldier reporting.
The girl’s questions were indisputably unresourceful, but, nevertheless,
she did manage to cover up my stupid escapade and to ease the
embarrassment of the prince, who listened at the same time with a merry
smile to something Miss Versilov was merrily whispering to him—
evidently not about me. A question, though: why should this girl, a total
stranger to me, volunteer to cover up my stupid escapade and all the rest?
At the same time, it was impossible to imagine that she had addressed me
just like that; there was an intention here. She looked at me all too
curiously, as if she also wanted me to take as much notice of her as
possible. I figured it all out afterwards and was not mistaken.
“What, today?” the prince cried suddenly, leaping up from his place.
“So you didn’t know?” Miss Versilov was surprised. “Olympe! The
prince didn’t know that Katerina Nikolaevna would be here today. We came
to see her, we thought she took the morning train and had long been at
home. We only just met her on the porch; she came straight from the station
and told us to go to you, and that she would come presently . . . Here she
is!”
The side door opened and—that woman appeared!
I already knew her face from an astonishing portrait that hung in the
prince’s office; I had studied that portrait all month. In her presence, I spent
some three minutes in the office and not for one second did I tear my eyes
from her face. But if I hadn’t known the portrait and had been asked, after

those three minutes, “What is she like?”—I wouldn’t have been able to
answer, because everything became clouded in me.
I only remember from those three minutes a truly beautiful woman,
whom the prince was kissing and making crosses over, and who suddenly—
just as soon as she entered—quickly began looking at me. I clearly heard
how the prince, obviously pointing to me, murmured something, with a sort
of little laugh, about a new secretary, and spoke my last name. She
somehow jerked her face up, gave me a nasty look, and smiled so insolently
that I suddenly made a step, went up to the prince, and murmured,
trembling terribly, without finishing a single word and, I think, with
chattering teeth:
“From then on I . . . my own affairs now . . . I’m going.”
And I turned and went out. No one said a word to me, not even the
prince; they all merely looked. The prince later told me that I turned so pale
that he was “simply frightened.”
Well, who could care!

Chapter Three
I
PRECISELY, WHO COULD CARE? The highest consideration absorbed
all trifles, and one powerful feeling satisfied me for everything. I went out
in a sort of rapture. Stepping into the street, I was ready to start singing. As
if on purpose, it was a lovely morning, sun, passersby, noise, movement,
joy, the crowd. But hadn’t this woman insulted me? From whom would I
have borne such a look and such an insolent smile without an immediate
protest, even the stupidest—it makes no difference—on my part? Note that
she was coming just so as to insult me the sooner, without ever having seen
me: in her eyes, I was “Versilov’s agent,” and she was convinced even then
and for a long time afterwards that Versilov held her entire fate in his hands
and had the means to ruin her at once, if he wished to, by means of a certain
document; she suspected as much at least. This was a duel to the death. And
here—I was not insulted! There was an insult, but I didn’t feel it! Far from
it! I was even glad; having come to hate her, I even felt I was beginning to
love her. “I don’t know, can a spider hate the fly it has picked out and wants
to catch? Sweet little fly! It seems to me that one loves one’s victim; at least
one may. You see, I love my enemy: I find it terribly pleasing, for instance,
that she’s so beautiful. I find it terribly pleasing, madam, that you are so
haughty and majestic; if you were a bit meeker, the satisfaction wouldn’t be
so great. You spat upon me, but I’m triumphant; if you were actually to spit
in my face with real spit, I really might not get angry, because you are my
victim—mine, and not his. What a fascinating thought! No, the secret
awareness of power is unbearably more enjoyable than manifest
domination. If I were worth a hundred million, I think I’d precisely enjoy
going around in my old clothes, so as to be taken for the measliest of men,
who all but begs for alms, and be pushed around and despised; for me, the
consciousness alone would be enough.”

That was how I would have translated my thoughts and my joy at that
time, and much of what I felt. I will add only that here, in what I’ve just
written, it has come out more light-minded: in reality, I was more profound
and modest. Maybe even now I’m more modest in myself than in my words
and deeds. God grant it!
Maybe I’ve done a very bad thing in sitting down to write; there is
immeasurably more left inside than what comes out in words. Your thought,
even a bad one, while it is with you, is always more profound, but in words
it is more ridiculous and dishonorable. Versilov told me that the complete
opposite happens only with the worst people. They just lie, it’s easy for
them; while I’m trying to write the whole truth, which is terribly hard!

II
ON THIS NINETEENTH day of the month, I took one more “step.”
For the first time since my arrival, I had money in my pocket, because
my sixty roubles, which I had saved up over two years, I had given to my
mother, as I mentioned above; but several days earlier I had resolved that,
on the day I got my salary, I would make a “test ” I had long been dreaming
of. Just the day before, I had cut out an address from a newspaper—an
announcement by “the bailiff of the St. Petersburg Civil Court,” and so on
and so forth, that “on the nineteenth of September instant, at twelve noon,
in the Kazan quarter, such-and-such precinct, etc., etc., at house number
whatever, the sale of the movable property of Mrs. Lebrecht will take
place,” and that “the description, value, and property itself can be seen on
the day of the sale,” etc., etc.
It was just past one o’clock. I hurried on foot to the address. It was over
two years since I’d taken a cab—I gave my word (otherwise I wouldn’t
have saved sixty roubles). I never went to auctions, I couldn’t afford it yet;
and though my present “step” was only tentative, even this step I had
resolved to resort to only when I had finished school, when I had broken
with everyone, when I had shrunk into my shell and become completely
free. True, I was still far from being in a “shell” and far from being free; but

I resolved to take the step only as a test—just so, in order to see, almost to
dream a little, as it were, and then perhaps not to come for a long time, until
it was a serious beginning. For everyone else it was only a small, stupid
little auction, but for me it was the first log for the ship in which Columbus
went to discover America. Those were my feelings at the time.
Reaching the place, I went into the courtyard indicated on the
announcement, and entered Mrs. Lebrecht’s apartment. The apartment
consisted of a front hall and four not very big, not very highceilinged
rooms. In the first room beyond the hall there was a crowd of up to thirty
people, of whom half were buyers and the rest, judging by their looks, were
either curious, or amateurs, or sent from Mrs. Lebrecht; there were both
merchants and Jews, who had their eye on the gold things, and there were
several people dressed “properly.” Even the physiognomies of some of
these gentlemen are imprinted on my memory. In the room to the right, in
the open doorway, a table had been placed squarely between the doorposts,
so that it was impossible to enter that room: the objects being perquisitioned
and sold were there. To the left was another room, but the doors to it were
closed, though they kept opening every moment by a little crack, through
which someone could be seen peeking out—it must have been one of Mrs.
Lebrecht’s numerous family, who naturally felt very ashamed at the
moment. At the table between the doors, facing the public, Mr. Bailiff sat
on a chair, wearing a badge, and carried out the sale of the objects. I found
the business almost half over already; as soon as I entered, I made my way
through the crowd to the table. Bronze candlesticks were being sold. I
began to look.
I looked and at once began to think: what can I buy here? And what was I
going to do right now with bronze candlesticks, and would I achieve my
goal, and was this how things were done, and would my calculation
succeed? And wasn’t my calculation childish? I thought of all this and
waited. It was the same sort of sensation as at the gambling table, at the
moment when you haven’t played a card yet, but have come over with the
intention of playing: “I’ll play if I want, and I’ll leave if I want—it’s my
choice.” Your heart isn’t pounding yet, but somehow hesitates and thrills
slightly—a sensation not without pleasure. But indecision quickly begins to

weigh you down, and you somehow turn blind: you reach out, you take a
card, but mechanically, almost against your will, as if someone else was
guiding your hand; finally you make up your mind and play—here the
sensation is quite different, tremendous. I’m writing not about the auction,
but only about myself: who else would have a pounding heart at an auction?
There were some who got excited, there were some who kept silent and
bided their time, there were some who bought and regretted it. I felt no pity
at all for a gentleman who, by mistake, having misheard, bought a nickel
silver pitcher instead of a silver one, for five roubles instead of two; I even
began to feel rather merry. The bailiff varied the objects: after the
candlesticks came earrings, after the earrings, an embroidered morocco
pillow, followed by a box—probably for the sake of diversity or in line with
the buyers’ demands. I didn’t even hold out for ten minutes, was tending
towards the pillow, then towards the box, but each time I stopped at the
decisive moment: the objects seemed quite impossible to me. Finally, an
album turned up in the bailiff’s hands.
“A family album, bound in red morocco, worn, with drawings in
watercolor and ink, in a carved ivory case with silver clasps—the starting
price is two roubles!”
I went up: the object looked refined, but there was a flaw in one place in
the ivory carving. I was the only one who went up, everybody was silent;
there were no competitors. I could have unfastened the clasps and taken the
album out of the case to examine it, but I didn’t exercise my right and only
waved a trembling hand, as if to say: “It makes no difference.”
“Two roubles, five kopecks,” I said, again, I believe, with chattering
teeth.
It fell to me. I took out the money at once, paid, snatched the album, and
went into a corner of the room; there I took it out of the case and feverishly,
hurriedly, began to examine it: excepting the case, it was the trashiest thing
in the world—a little album the size of small-format letter paper, thin, with
worn gilt edges—exactly the kind that girls used to start keeping in the old

days, as soon as they left the institute. Temples on hills, cupids, a pond with
swans floating on it, were drawn in watercolors and ink; there were verses:
I am setting out for far away,
I am leaving Moscow for many a day,
To all my dear ones I say good-bye,
By stagecoach to the Crimee I fly.
(They’ve been preserved in my memory!) I decided that I had “failed”; if
there was anything nobody needed, this was precisely it.
“Never mind,” I decided, “you always lose on the first card; it’s even a
good omen.”
I was decidedly cheerful.
“Ah, I’m too late! It’s yours? Did you acquire it?” I suddenly heard
beside me the voice of a gentleman in a dark blue coat, well dressed and of
an imposing air. He was too late.
“I’m too late. Ah, what a pity! How much?”
“Two roubles, five kopecks.”
“Ah, what a pity! Won’t you let me have it?”
“Let’s step out,” I whispered to him, my heart skipping a beat.
We went out to the stairway.
“I’ll let you have it for ten roubles,” I said, feeling a chill in my spine.
“Ten roubles! Good heavens, how can you!”
“As you wish.”
He stared wide-eyed at me; I was well dressed, in no way resembled a
Jew or a retailer.

“Merciful heavens, it’s a trashy old album, who needs it? The case is in
fact quite worthless, you won’t sell it to anybody.”
“You want to buy it.”
“But mine is a special case, I found out only yesterday, I’m the only one
like that! Good heavens, how can you!”
“I should have asked twenty-five roubles; but since there was a risk that
you’d let it go, I asked only ten so as to be sure. I won’t go down even a
kopeck.”
I turned and walked away.
“Take four roubles,” he overtook me in the courtyard, “or make it five.”
I said nothing and walked on.
“All right, here!” He took out ten roubles, and I gave him the album.
“But you must agree it’s dishonest! Two roubles and ten—eh?”
“Why dishonest? It’s the market!”
“What kind of market is this?” (He was angry.)
“Where there’s demand, there’s the market. If you hadn’t asked, I
wouldn’t have been able to sell it for forty kopecks.”
Though I wasn’t laughing out loud and looked serious, I did laugh my
head off inwardly, not really with delight, but I don’t know why myself,
slightly out of breath.
“Listen,” I murmured quite irrepressibly, but amiably and loving him
terribly, “listen: when James Rothschild,13 the late one, in Paris, the one
who left seventeen hundred million francs” (the man nodded), “while still a
young man, when he chanced to learn a few hours ahead of everybody else
about the murder of the Duke of Berry, he rushed off at once to inform the

right people, and with that one trick, in one instant, made several million—
that’s the way to do it!”
“So you’re Rothschild, are you?” he shouted at me indignantly, as at a
fool.
I quickly left the house. One step—and I’d made seven roubles, ninetyfive kopecks! The step was meaningless, child’s play, I agree, but even so it
coincided with my thought and couldn’t help stirring me extremely deeply .
. . However, there’s no point in describing feelings. The ten-rouble bill was
in my waistcoat pocket, I stuck two fingers in to feel it—and walked along
that way, without taking my hand out. Having gone about a hundred steps
down the street, I took it out to look at it, looked, and wanted to kiss it. A
carriage suddenly clattered at the porch of a house; the doorkeeper opened
the door, and a lady came out of the house to get into the carriage,
magnificent, young, beautiful, rich, in silk and velvet, with a fivefoot train.
Suddenly a pretty little pocketbook dropped from her hand and fell on the
ground; she got in; the valet bent down to pick up the little thing, but I ran
over quickly, picked it up, and handed it to the lady, tipping my hat. (It was
a top hat, I was dressed like a young gentleman, not so badly.) With
restraint, but smiling most pleasantly, the lady said to me, “Merci , m’sieu.”
The carriage clattered off. I kissed the ten-rouble bill.

III
THAT SAME DAY I had to see Efim Zverev, one of my former high-school
comrades, who had dropped out of school and enrolled in some specialized
higher institute in Petersburg. He himself is not worth describing, and in
fact I wasn’t friends with him; but I had looked him up in Petersburg; he
could (owing to various circumstances that are also not worth talking about)
tell me the address of a certain Kraft, a man I needed very much, once he
came back from Vilno. Zverev expected him precisely that day or the next,
and had informed me of it two days before. I had to walk to the Petersburg
side, but I wasn’t tired at all.

I found Zverev (who was also about nineteen years old) in the courtyard
of his aunt’s house, where he was living temporarily. He had just had dinner
and was walking around the courtyard on stilts; he informed me at once that
Kraft had arrived the day before and stopped off at his former apartment,
also there on the Petersburg side, and that he wished to see me himself as
soon as possible, to inform me immediately of something necessary.
“He’s going away again,” Efim added.
Since in my present circumstances it was of capital importance for me to
see Kraft, I asked Efim to take me at once to his apartment, which turned
out to be two steps away in a lane. But Zverev declared that he had met
Kraft an hour before and that he had gone to see Dergachev.14
“So let’s go to Dergachev’s, why do you keep making excuses—are you
scared?”
Indeed, Kraft might spend a long time at Dergachev’s, and then where
was I to wait for him? I wasn’t scared of going to Dergachev’s, but I didn’t
want to, though this was already the third time Efim tried to drag me there.
And this “scared” he always pronounced with the nastiest smile on my
score. It wasn’t a matter of being scared, I declare beforehand, and if I was
afraid, it was of something quite different. This time I decided to go; it was
also just two steps away. As we went, I asked Efim whether he still
intended to run away to America.
“I may wait a little,” he answered with a slight laugh.
I didn’t much like him, I even didn’t like him at all. His hair was very
blond, he had a full, much too white face, even indecently white, to the
point of infantility, and he was even taller than I, but you wouldn’t have
taken him for more than seventeen years old. I had nothing to talk about
with him.
“And what’s there? Always a crowd?” I asked for the sake of solidity.
“But why do you keep getting scared?” he laughed again.

“Go to the devil!” I got angry.
“Not a crowd at all. Only acquaintances come, and all our people, rest
assured.”
“But what the devil business is it of mine whether they’re all your people
or not? Am I one of your people? Why should they go and trust me?”
“I’m bringing you, and that’s enough. They’ve even heard about you.
Kraft can also speak for you.”
“Listen, will Vasin be there?”
“I don’t know.”
“If he is, nudge me as soon as we go in and point to Vasin—as soon as
we go in, you hear?”
I had heard a lot about Vasin and had long been interested.
Dergachev lived in a little wing in the courtyard of a wooden house that
belonged to a merchant’s widow, but the whole wing was at his disposal.
There were three good rooms in all. The four windows all had their blinds
lowered. He was a technician and had a job in Petersburg; I had heard in
passing that he had been offered a profitable private post in the provinces
and that he was about to set off.
As soon as we went into the tiny front hall, we heard voices; there
seemed to be a heated argument and someone shouted: “Quae medicamenta
non sanant, ferrum sanat; quae ferrum non sanat, ignis sanat.”1715
I was actually somewhat worried. Of course, I wasn’t used to company,
even whatever it might be. In high school I had addressed all my comrades
informally, but I was comrades with almost none of them; I had made
myself a corner and lived in my corner. But that was not what troubled me.
In any case, I had promised myself not to get into any arguments and to say

only what was most necessary, so that no one could draw any conclusions
about me; above all—don’t argue.
In the room, which was even much too small, there were some seven
people, ten including the women. Dergachev was twentyfive years old, and
he was married. His wife had a sister and another female relation; they also
lived at Dergachev’s. The room was furnished haphazardly, though
sufficiently, and was even clean. On the wall hung a lithographic portrait,
but a very cheap one, and in the corner an icon without a casing, but with a
lighted icon lamp. Dergachev came over to me, shook hands, and invited
me to sit down.
“Sit down, they’re all our people here.”
“Be so kind,” a young woman added at once. She was rather pretty, very
modestly dressed, and having bowed slightly to me, she at once went out.
This was his wife, and it seemed by the look of it that she, too, had been
arguing, but had now gone to nurse the baby. The other two ladies remained
in the room—one very short, about twenty years old, in a black dress, and
also not a bad-looking sort, while the other was about thirty, dry and sharpeyed. They sat, listened very much, but did not enter into the conversation.
As far as the men were concerned, they were all standing, and the only
ones seated, apart from me, were Kraft and Vasin. Efim pointed them out to
me at once, because I was now seeing Kraft as well for the first time in my
life. I got up from my seat and went over to make their acquaintance. I’ll
never forget Kraft’s face: no special beauty, but something as if all too meek
and delicate, though personal dignity showed everywhere. Twenty-six years
old, rather lean, of above-average height, blond, his face grave but soft;
overall there was something gentle in him. And yet, if you had asked me, I
would never have traded my maybe even very banal face for his face, which
I found so attractive. There was something in his face that I wouldn’t want
to have in mine, something all too calm in a moral sense, something like a
sort of secret, unconscious pride. However, I was probably unable to judge
so literally then; it seems to me now that I judged that way then, that is,
after the event.

“I’m very glad you’ve come,” said Kraft. “I have a letter that concerns
you. We’ll sit here a while and then go to my place.”
Dergachev was of medium height, broad-shouldered, very dark-haired,
with a big beard; in his glance once could see quickwittedness and restraint
in everything, a certain constant wariness; though he was mainly silent, he
was obviously in control of the conversation. Vasin’s physiognomy did not
impress me very much, though I had heard he was extremely intelligent:
blond, with big light gray eyes, a very open face, but at the same time there
was something as if excessively hard in it: one sensed little sociability, but
his gaze was decidedly intelligent, more intelligent than Dergachev’s, more
profound—the most intelligent in the room; however, maybe I’m
exaggerating it all now. Of the rest, I recall only two faces among all those
young men: one tall, swarthy man with black side-whiskers, who talked a
lot, about twenty-seven years old, a teacher or something of that sort, and
also a young fellow of my age, in a long Russian vest—with a wrinkle in
his face, taciturn, a listener. He turned out later to be of peasant stock.
“No, that’s not the way to put it,” began the teacher with black sidewhiskers, who was the most excited of them all, obviously taking up the
previous argument again. “I’m not saying anything about mathematical
proofs, but this idea, which I’m ready to believe even without mathematical
proofs . . .”
“Wait, Tikhomirov,” Dergachev interrupted loudly, “the latest arrivals
don’t understand. This, you see,” he suddenly turned to me alone (and, I
confess, if his intention was to examine me as a newcomer or make me
speak, the method was very clever on his part; I immediately sensed it and
prepared myself ), “this, you see, is Mr. Kraft, whose character and solid
convictions are quite well-known to us all. Starting from a rather ordinary
fact, he has arrived at a rather extraordinary conclusion, which has surprised
everybody. He has deduced that the Russian people are a second-rate people
. . .”
“Third-rate,” someone cried.

“. . . second-rate, whose fate is to serve merely as material for a more
noble race, and not to have its own independent role in the destinies of
mankind. In view of this possibly correct deduction of his, Mr. Kraft has
come to the conclusion that any further activity of any Russian man should
be paralyzed by this idea, so to speak, that everyone should drop their hands
and . . .”
“Permit me, Dergachev, that’s not the way to put it,” Tikhomirov again
picked up impatiently (Dergachev yielded at once). “In view of the fact that
Kraft has done serious research, has deduced deductions on the basis of
physiology, which he considers mathematical, and has killed maybe two
years on his idea (which I would quite calmly accept a priori), in view of
that, that is, in view of Kraft’s anxieties and seriousness, this matter
presents itself as a phenomenon. A question arises from all this which Kraft
cannot comprehend, and that is what we should occupy ourselves with, that
is, Kraft’s incomprehension, because it is a phenomenon. We should decide
whether this is a clinical phenomenon, as a singular case, or is a property
that may normally be repeated in others; this is of interest in view of the
common cause. I shall believe Kraft about Russia and even say that I am
perhaps also glad; if this idea were adopted by everyone, it would unbind
hands and free many from patriotic prejudice . . .”
“It’s not out of patriotism,” said Kraft, as if with strain. This whole
debate seemed disagreeable to him.
“Patriotism or not, that can be left aside,” said Vasin, who was very
silent.
“But, tell me, how could Kraft’s deduction weaken the striving for the
general human cause?” shouted the teacher (he alone shouted, all the rest
spoke quietly). “Suppose Russia is destined to be second-rate; but it is
possible not to work for Russia alone. And, besides, how can Kraft be a
patriot, if he has ceased to believe in Russia?”
“Anyhow he’s German,” a voice was heard again.
“I’m Russian,” said Kraft.

“That question is not directly related to the matter,” Dergachev pointed
out to the one who had interrupted.
“Abandon the narrowness of your idea.” Tikhomirov wouldn’t listen to
anything. “If Russia is only material for nobler races, why shouldn’t she
serve as such material? It’s a handsome enough role. Why not settle on this
idea with a view to broadening the task? Mankind is on the eve of its
regeneration, which has already begun. Only blind men can deny the
forthcoming task. Leave Russia, if you’ve lost faith in her, and work for the
future—for the future of a still unknown people, but which will be
composed of all mankind, with no distinction of races. Even without that,
Russia will die one day; peoples, even the most gifted of them, live no more
than fifteen hundred, two thousand years at most; what difference does it
make, two thousand or two hundred years? The Romans didn’t survive even
fifteen hundred years as a living entity, and they also became material.
They’re long gone, but they left an idea, and it entered into the destinies of
mankind as an element of things to come. How can you tell a man there’s
nothing to do? I can’t imagine a situation in which there could ever be
nothing to do! Do it for mankind and don’t worry about the rest. There’s so
much to do that a lifetime won’t be enough, if you look around attentively.”
“We must live by the law of nature and truth,”16 Mrs. Dergachev said
from behind the door. The door was slightly ajar, and she could be seen
standing there, holding the baby to her breast, with her breast covered, and
listening ardently.
Kraft listened, smiling slightly, and finally said, as if with a somewhat
weary look, though with great sincerity:
“I don’t understand how it’s possible, while under the influence of some
dominant idea, to which your mind and heart are totally subject, to live by
anything that lies outside that idea.”
“But if you’re told logically, mathematically, that your deduction is
mistaken, that the whole thought is mistaken, that you do not have the least
right to exclude yourself from general useful activity only because Russia is

predestined to be second-rate; if you are shown that, instead of a narrow
horizon, an infinity is open to you, that instead of a narrow idea of
patriotism . . .”
“Eh!” Kraft quietly waved his hand, “but I told you it’s not a matter of
patriotism.”
“There’s obviously a misunderstanding here,” Vasin suddenly mixed in.
“The mistake is that for Kraft it’s not just a logical deduction, but, so to
speak, a deduction that has turned into a feeling. Not all natures are the
same; for many, a logical deduction sometimes turns into the strongest
feeling, which takes over their whole being, and which it is very difficult to
drive out or alter. To cure such a person, it’s necessary in that case to
change the feeling itself, which can be done only by replacing it with
another that is equally strong. That is always difficult, and in many cases
impossible.”
“Mistake!” the arguer yelled. “A logical deduction in itself already
breaks down prejudices. An intelligent conviction generates the same
feeling. Thought proceeds from feeling and, installing itself in a person in
its turn, formulates the new!”
“People are very varied: some change their feelings easily, others with
difficulty,” replied Vasin, as if not wishing to prolong the argument; but I
was delighted with his idea.
“It’s precisely as you say!” I suddenly turned to him, breaking the ice and
suddenly beginning to speak. “It’s precisely necessary to put one feeling in
the place of another, so as to replace it. Four years ago, in Moscow, a
certain general . . . You see, gentlemen, I didn’t know him, but . . . Maybe
he, indeed, could not inspire respect on his own . . . And besides, the fact
itself might seem unreasonable, but . . . However, you see, his child died,
that is, as a matter of fact, two girls, one after the other, of scarlet fever . . .
Well, he was suddenly so crushed that he was sad all the time, so sad that he
went around and you couldn’t even look at him—and he ended by dying in
about half a year. That he died of it is a fact! What, then, could have

resurrected him? Answer: a feeling of equal strength! Those two girls
should have been dug up from the grave and given to him—that’s all, or
something of the sort. So he died. And meanwhile you could have presented
him with beautiful deductions: that life is fleeting, that everyone is mortal;
presented him with calendar statistics,17 how many children die of scarlet
fever . . . He was retired . . .”
I stopped, breathless, and looked around.
“That’s not it at all,” someone said.
“The fact you cite, though not of the same kind as the given case, still
resembles it and clarifies the matter,” Vasin turned to me.

IV
HERE I MUST confess why I was delighted with Vasin’s argument about
the “idea-feeling,” and along with that I must confess to an infernal shame.
Yes, I was scared to go to Dergachev’s, though not for the reason Efim
supposed. I was scared because I had already been afraid of them in
Moscow. I knew that they (that is, they or others of their sort—it makes no
difference) were dialecticians and would perhaps demolish “my idea.” I was
firmly convinced in myself that I would not betray or tell my idea to them;
but they (that is, again, they or their sort) might tell me something on their
own that would make me disappointed in my idea, even without my
mentioning it to them. There were questions in “my idea” that I hadn’t
resolved yet, but I didn’t want anyone to resolve them except me. In the last
two years I had even stopped reading books, afraid of coming across some
passage that would not be in favor of the “idea,” that might shake me. And
suddenly Vasin resolves the problem at a stroke and sets me at peace in the
highest sense. Indeed, what was I afraid of, and what could they do to me
with no matter what dialectics? Perhaps I was the only one there who
understood what Vasin said about the “idea-feeling”! It’s not enough to
refute a beautiful idea, one must replace it with something equally
beautiful; otherwise, in my heart, unwilling to part with my feeling for
anything, I will refute the refutation, even by force, whatever they may say.

And what could they give me instead? And therefore I should have been
braver, I was obliged to be more courageous. Delighted with Vasin, I felt
shame, felt myself an unworthy child!
This resulted in yet another shame. Not the vile little urge to boast of my
intelligence that had made me break the ice there and start talking, but also
a desire to “throw myself on their necks.” This desire to throw myself on
people’s necks so that they recognize me as good and start embracing me or
something like that (swinishness, in short), I consider the most loathsome of
all my shames, and I had suspected it in myself for a very long time—
namely, ever since the corner I had kept myself in for so many years,
though I don’t regret it. I knew that I had to be gloomier among people.
What comforted me, after each such disgrace, was simply that the “idea”
was with me all the same, in secret as always, and that I hadn’t betrayed it
to them. With a sinking feeling, I sometimes imagined that once I had
spoken my idea to someone, I would suddenly have nothing left, so that I’d
become like everybody else, and might even abandon the idea; and so I
preserved and cherished it and trembled at the thought of babbling. And
then at Dergachev’s, almost with the first encounter, I had been unable to
hold out, I hadn’t betrayed anything, of course, but I had babbled
inadmissibly; the result was disgrace. A nasty recollection! No, it’s
impossible for me to live with people; I think so even now; I say it for forty
years to come. My idea is—my corner.

V
AS SOON AS VASIN praised me, I suddenly felt an irrepressible urge to
speak.
“In my opinion, each of us has the right to have his own feelings . . . if
it’s from conviction . . . so that no one should reproach him for them,” I
addressed Vasin. Though I spoke glibly, it was as if it wasn’t me, but as if
somebody else’s tongue was moving in my mouth.
“Re-e-eally, sir?” a voice picked up at once, drawling ironically, the same
that had interrupted Dergachev and had shouted to Kraft that he was a

German.
Considering him a total nonentity, I turned to the teacher, as if it was he
who had shouted.
“My conviction is that I cannot judge anyone,” I trembled, already
knowing that I was going to fly off.
“Why such secrecy?” the nonentity’s voice rang out again.
“Each of us has his idea,” I looked point-blank at the teacher, who, on the
contrary, was silent and studied me with a smile.
“Do you?” shouted the nonentity.
“It’s too long to tell . . . But part of my idea is precisely that I should be
left in peace. As long as I’ve got two roubles, I want to live alone, not
depending on anybody (don’t worry, I know the objections), and not doing
anything—even for that great future of mankind for which Mr. Kraft has
been invited to work. Personal freedom, I mean my own, sir, is foremost,
and I do not want to know anything beyond that.”
My mistake was that I got angry.
“That is, you preach the placidity of a sated cow?”
“Let it be so. There’s no insult in a cow. I don’t owe anyone anything, I
pay society money in the form of fiscal impositions, so that I won’t be
robbed, beaten, or killed, and no one dares to demand anything more from
me. I personally may have other ideas, and would like to serve mankind,
and will, and maybe even ten times more than all the preachers, but I only
want it to be so that no one dares to demand it of me, or forces me, like Mr.
Kraft; my full freedom, even if I don’t lift a finger. And to run around
throwing yourself on other people’s necks out of love for mankind, and
burn with tears of tenderness—that is merely a fashion. And why should I
necessarily love my neighbor or your future mankind, which I’ll never see,
which will not know about me, and which in its turn will rot without

leaving any trace or remembrance (time means nothing here), when the
earth in its turn will become an icy stone and fly through airless space
together with an infinite multitude of identical icy stones, that is, more
meaningless than anything one can possibly imagine! There’s your
teaching! Tell me, why should I necessarily be noble, especially if it all lasts
no more than a minute?”
“B-bah!” shouted the voice.
I had fired all this off nervously and spitefully, snapping all the ropes. I
knew I was falling into a pit, but I hurried for fear of objections. I sensed
only too well that I was pouring as if through a sieve, incoherently, and
skipping ten thoughts to get to the eleventh, but I was in a hurry to convince
and reconquer them. This was so important for me! I’d been preparing for
three years! But, remarkably, they suddenly fell silent, said absolutely
nothing, and listened. I went on addressing the teacher:
“Precisely, sir. A certain extremely intelligent man said, among other
things, that there is nothing more difficult than to answer the question,
‘Why must one necessarily be noble?’ You see, sir, there are three sorts of
scoundrels in the world: naïve scoundrels, that is, those who are convinced
that their meanness is the highest nobility; ashamed scoundrels, that is,
those who are ashamed of their meanness, but fully intend to go through
with it anyway; and, finally, sheer scoundrels, purebred scoundrels. With
your permission, sir: I had a friend, Lambert, who at the age of sixteen said
to me that when he was rich, his greatest pleasure would be to feed dogs
bread and meat, while the children of the poor were dying of hunger, and
when they had no wood for their stoves, he would buy a whole lumberyard,
stack it up in a field, and burn it there, and give not a stick to the poor.
Those were his feelings! Tell me, what answer should I give this purebred
scoundrel when he asks, ‘Why should I necessarily be noble?’ And
especially now, in our time, which you have so refashioned. Because it has
never been worse than it is now. Things are not at all clear in our society,
gentlemen. I mean, you deny God, you deny great deeds, what sort of deaf,
blind, dull torpor can make me act this way, if it’s more profitable for me
otherwise? You say, ‘A reasonable attitude towards mankind is also to my

profit’; but what if I find all these reasonablenesses unreasonable, all these
barracks and phalansteries?18 What the devil do I care about them, or about
the future, when I live only once in this world? Allow me to know my own
profit myself: it’s more amusing. What do I care what happens to this
mankind of yours in a thousand years, if, by your code, I get no love for it,
no future life, no recognition of my great deed? No, sir, in that case I shall
live for myself in the most impolite fashion, and they can all go to blazes!”
“An excellent wish!”
“However, I’m always ready to join in.”
“Even better!” (This was still that same voice.)
The rest went on being silent, they went on peering at me and studying
me; but tittering gradually began to come from different ends of the room,
still quiet, but they all tittered right in my face. Only Vasin and Kraft did not
titter. The one with the black side-whiskers also grinned; he looked at me
point-blank and listened.
“Gentlemen,” I was trembling all over, “I won’t tell you my idea for
anything, but, on the contrary, I will ask you from your own point of view
—don’t think it’s mine, because it may be that I love mankind a thousand
times more than all of you taken together! Tell me—and you absolutely
must answer me now, you are duty bound, because you’re laughing—tell
me, how will you entice me to follow you? Tell me, how will you prove to
me that with you it will be better? Where are you going to put the protest of
my person in your barracks? I have long wished to meet you, gentlemen!
You will have barracks, communal apartments, stricte necessaire,18
atheism, and communal wives without children—that’s your finale, I know
it, sirs. And for all that, for that small share of middling profit that your
reasonableness secures for me, for a crust and some warmth, you take my
whole person in exchange! With your permission, sir: say my wife is taken
away; are you going to subdue my person so that I won’t smash my rival’s
head in? You’ll say that I myself will become more reasonable then; but

what will the wife of such a reasonable husband say, if she has the slightest
respect for herself? No, it’s unnatural, sirs; shame on you!”
“And you’re what—a specialist in the ladies’ line?” the gleeful voice of
the nonentity rang out.
For a moment I had the thought of throwing myself at him and pounding
him with my fists. He was a shortish fellow, red-haired and freckled . . . but,
anyhow, devil take his looks!
“Don’t worry, I’ve never yet known a woman,” I said curtly, addressing
him for the first time.
“Precious information, which might have been given more politely, in
view of the ladies!”
But they all suddenly began stirring densely; they all started taking their
hats and preparing to leave—not on account of me, of course, but because
the time had come; but this silent treatment of me crushed me with shame. I
also jumped to my feet.
“Allow me, however, to know your name, you did keep looking at me,”
the teacher suddenly stepped towards me with the meanest smile.
“Dolgoruky.”
“Prince Dolgoruky?”
“No, simply Dolgoruky, the son of the former serf Makar Dolgoruky and
the illegitimate son of my former master, Mr. Versilov. Don’t worry,
gentlemen, I’m not saying it so that you’ll throw yourselves on my neck
and we’ll all start lowing like calves from tenderness!”
A loud and most unceremonious burst of laughter came at once, so that
the baby who had fallen asleep behind the door woke up and squealed. I
was trembling with fury. They all shook hands with Dergachev and left,
paying no attention to me.

“Let’s go,” Kraft nudged me.
I went up to Dergachev, squeezed his hand as hard as I could, and shook
it several times, also as hard as I could.
“I apologize for the constant insults from Kudriumov” (that was the redhaired one), Dergachev said to me.
I followed Kraft out. I wasn’t ashamed of anything.

VI
OF COURSE, BETWEEN me as I am now and me as I was then there is an
infinite difference.
Continuing to be “not ashamed of anything,” I caught up with Vasin
while still on the stairs, having left Kraft behind as second-rate, and with
the most natural air, as if nothing had happened, asked:
“It seems you know my father—that is, I mean to say, Versilov?”
“We’re not, in fact, acquainted,” Vasin answered at once (and without a
whit of that offensive, refined politeness assumed by delicate people when
speaking with someone who has just disgraced himself ), “but I know him
slightly; I’ve met him and listened to him.”
“If you’ve listened to him, then, of course, you know him, because you
are—you! What do you think of him? Forgive the hasty question, but I need
to know. Precisely what you would think, your own proper opinion is
necessary.”
“You’re asking a lot of me. It seems to me that the man is capable of
placing enormous demands on himself and, perhaps, of fulfilling them—but
he renders no account to anyone.”
“That’s right, that’s very right, he’s a very proud man! But is he a pure
man? Listen, what do you think of his Catholicism? However, I forgot that

you may not know . . .”
If I hadn’t been so excited, I naturally would not have fired off such
questions, and so pointlessly, at a man I had never spoken with, but had
only heard about. It surprised me that Vasin seemed not to notice my
madness.
“I’ve also heard something about that, but I don’t know how correct it
might be,” he answered as calmly and evenly as before.
“Not a bit! It’s not true about him! Do you really think he can believe in
God?”
“He’s a very proud man, as you just said yourself, and many very proud
people like to believe in God, especially those who are somewhat
contemptuous of people. In many strong people there seems to be a sort of
natural need—to find someone or something to bow down to. It’s
sometimes very hard for a strong man to bear his own strength.”
“Listen, that must be terribly right!” I cried out again. “Only I wish I
could understand . . .”
“Here the reason is clear: they choose God so as not to bow down before
people—naturally, not knowing themselves how it comes about in them: to
bow down before God is not so offensive. They become extremely ardent
believers—or, to put it more correctly, they ardently desire to believe; but
they take the desire for belief itself. In the end they very often become
disappointed. As for Mr. Versilov, I think there are also extremely sincere
traits of character in him. And generally he interests me.”
“ Vasin!” I cried out, “you make me so glad! I’m not surprised at your
intelligence, I’m surprised that you, a man so pure and so immeasurably far
above me—that you can walk with me and speak so simply and politely, as
if nothing had happened!”
Vasin smiled.

“You praise me too much, and all that happened there was that you’re too
fond of abstract conversation. You were probably silent for a very long time
before this.”
“I was silent for three years, I’ve been preparing to speak for three years .
. . To you, naturally, I couldn’t have seemed a fool, because you are
extremely intelligent yourself, though it would be impossible to behave
more stupidly than I did—but a scoundrel!”
“A scoundrel?”
“Yes, undoubtedly! Tell me, don’t you secretly despise me for saying that
I was Versilov’s illegitimate son . . . and boasting that I was the son of a serf
?”
“You torment yourself too much. If you find that you spoke badly, you
need only not speak that way the next time; you still have fifty years ahead
of you.”
“Oh, I know I should be very silent with people. The meanest of all
debauches is to throw yourself on people’s necks; I just said it to them, and
here I am throwing myself on yours! But there’s a difference, isn’t there? If
you’ve understood that difference, if you were capable of understanding it,
I’ll bless this moment!”
Vasin smiled again.
“Come and see me, if you want to,” he said. “I have work now and am
busy, but you’ll give me pleasure.”
“I concluded earlier, from your physiognomy, that you were all too firm
and uncommunicative.”
“That may very well be so. I knew your sister, Lizaveta Makarovna, last
year in Luga . . . Kraft has stopped and seems to be waiting for you; he has
to turn there.”

I firmly shook Vasin’s hand and ran to join Kraft, who had gone ahead of
us while I was talking with Vasin. We silently went as far as his quarters; I
did not want to speak to him yet, and could not. One of the strongest traits
of Kraft’s character was his delicacy.

Chapter Four
I
KRAFT USED TO be in government service somewhere, and along with
that had also helped the late Andronikov (for a remuneration from him) to
conduct some private affairs, which the latter had always engaged in on top
of his government work. For me the important thing was that Kraft, owing
to his particular closeness to Andronikov, might be informed of much that
so interested me. But I knew from Marya Ivanovna, the wife of Nikolai
Semyonovich, with whom I lived for so many years while I was in school—
and who was the niece, the ward, and the favorite of Andronikov—that
Kraft had even been “charged” with delivering something to me. I had been
waiting for him that whole month.
He lived in a small two-room apartment, completely separate, and at the
present moment, having only just returned, was even without a servant. The
suitcase, though unpacked, had not been put away; things were strewn over
chairs, and laid out on the table in front of the sofa were a valise, a traveling
strongbox, a revolver, and so on. Coming in, Kraft was extremely pensive,
as if he had totally forgotten about me; he may not even have noticed that I
hadn’t spoken to him on the way. He at once began looking for something,
but, glancing into the mirror in passing, he stopped and studied his face
closely for a whole minute. Though I noticed this peculiarity (and later
recalled it very well), I was sad and very confused. I couldn’t concentrate.
There was a moment when I suddenly wanted to up and leave and thus
abandon all these matters forever. And what were all these matters
essentially? Weren’t they simply self-inflicted cares? I was beginning to
despair that I was maybe spending my energy on unworthy trifles out of
mere sentimentality, while I had an energetic task before me. And
meanwhile my incapacity for serious business was obviously showing
itself, in view of what had happened at Dergachev’s.

“Kraft, will you go to them again?” I suddenly asked him. He slowly
turned to me, as if he hadn’t quite understood me. I sat down on a chair.
“Forgive them!” Kraft said suddenly.
To me, of course, this seemed like mockery; but, looking at him
attentively, I saw such a strange and even astonishing ingenuousness in his
face, that I was even astonished at how seriously he had asked me to
“forgive” them. He moved a chair and sat down beside me.
“I myself know that I’m maybe a rag-bag of all the vanities and nothing
more,” I began, “but I don’t ask forgiveness.”
“And there’s no one to ask,” he said softly and seriously. He spoke softly
and very slowly all the time.
“Let me be guilty before myself . . . I like being guilty before myself . . .
Kraft, forgive me for babbling here with you. Tell me, can it be that you’re
also in that circle? That’s what I wanted to ask.”
“They’re no more stupid than others, nor more intelligent; they’re crazy,
like everybody.”
“So everybody’s crazy?” I turned to him with involuntary curiosity.
“Among the better sort of people now, everybody’s crazy. Only
mediocrity and giftlessness are having a heyday . . . However, that’s all not
worth . . .”
As he spoke, he somehow stared into space, began phrases and broke
them off. Especially striking was a sort of despondency in his voice.
“Can it be that Vasin’s with them? Vasin has a mind, Vasin has a moral
idea!” I cried.
“There aren’t any moral ideas now; suddenly not one can be found, and,
above all, it looks as if there never were any.”

“Before there weren’t?”
“Better drop that,” he said with obvious fatigue.
I was touched by his woeful seriousness. Ashamed of my egoism, I
started to fall into his tone.
“The present time,” he began himself, after a couple of minutes of silence
and still staring somewhere into space, “the present time is a time of the
golden mean and insensibility, a passion for ignorance, idleness, an inability
to act, and a need to have everything ready-made. No one ponders; rarely
does anyone live his way into an idea.”
He broke off again and was silent for a little while. I listened.
“Now they’re deforesting Russia, exhausting her soil, turning it into
steppe, and preparing it for the Kalmyks.19 If a man of hope were to appear
and plant a tree, everyone would laugh: ‘Do you think you’ll live so long?’
On the other hand, those who desire the good talk about what will be in a
thousand years. The binding idea has disappeared completely. Everyone
lives as if in a flophouse, and tomorrow it’s up and out of Russia; everyone
lives only so far as there’s enough for him . . .”
“Excuse me, Kraft, you said, ‘They’re concerned about what will be in a
thousand years.’ Well, but your despair . . . about the fate of Russia . . . isn’t
it the same sort of concern?”
“That . . . that is the most urgent question there is!” he said irritably and
quickly got up from his place.
“Ah, yes! I forgot!” he said suddenly in a completely different voice,
looking at me in bewilderment. “I invited you on business, and meanwhile .
. . For God’s sake, forgive me.”
It was as if he suddenly came out of some sort of dream, almost
embarrassed; he took a letter from a briefcase that lay on the table and gave
it to me.

“That is what I was to deliver to you. It is a document having a certain
importance,” he began with attentiveness and with a most businesslike air.
Long afterwards I was struck when I remembered this ability of his (at
such a time for him!) to treat another’s business with such heartfelt
attentiveness, to tell of it so calmly and firmly.
“This is a letter of that same Stolbeev, following whose death a case
arose between Versilov and the Princes Sokolsky over his will. That case is
now being decided in court and will surely be decided in Versilov’s favor;
the law is with him. Meanwhile, in this letter, a personal one, written two
years ago, the testator himself sets forth his actual will, or, more correctly,
his wish, and sets it forth rather in the princes’ favor than in Versilov’s. At
least the points that the Princes Sokolsky base themselves on in disputing
the will gain much strength from this letter. Versilov’s opponents would
give a lot for this document, which, however, has no decisive legal
significance. Alexei Nikanorovich (Andronikov), who was handling
Versilov’s case, kept this letter and, not long before his death, gave it to me,
charging me to ‘stow it away’—perhaps fearing for his papers in
anticipation of his death. I have no wish now to judge Alexei
Nikanorovich’s intentions in this matter, and, I confess, after his death I was
painfully undecided about what to do with this document, especially in
view of the impending decision of the court case. But Marya Ivanovna, in
whom Alexei Nikanorovich seems to have confided very much while he
lived, brought me out of this difficulty: three weeks ago she wrote to me
very resolutely that I should give the document precisely to you, and that
this would also seem (her expression) to coincide with Andronikov’s will.
So here is the document, and I’m very glad that I can finally deliver it.”
“Listen,” I said, puzzled by such unexpected news, “what am I going to
do now with this letter? How am I to act?”
“That’s as you will.”
“Impossible, I’m terribly unfree, you must admit! Versilov has been
waiting so for this inheritance . . . and, you know, he’ll die without this help

—and suddenly there exists such a document!”
“It exists only here in this room.”
“Can it be so?” I looked at him attentively.
“If you yourself can’t find how to act in this case, what advice can I give
you?”
“But I can’t turn it over to Prince Sokolsky either; I’ll kill all Versilov’s
hopes and, besides that, come out as a traitor before him . . . On the other
hand, by giving it to Versilov, I’ll reduce innocent people to poverty, and
still put Versilov in an impossible position: either to renounce the
inheritance or to become a thief.”
“You greatly exaggerate the significance of the matter.”
“Tell me one thing. Does this document have a decisive, definitive
character?”
“No, it doesn’t. I’m not much of a jurist. The lawyer for the opposing
side would, of course, know how to put this document to use and derive all
possible benefit from it; but Alexei Nikanorovich found positively that this
letter, if presented, would have no great legal significance, so that Versilov’s
case could be won anyway. This document sooner represents, so to speak, a
matter of conscience . . .”
“But that’s the most important thing of all,” I interrupted, “that’s
precisely why Versilov will be in an impossible position.”
“He can destroy the document, however, and then, on the contrary, he’ll
deliver himself from any danger.”
“Do you have special grounds for supposing that of him, Kraft? That’s
what I want to know, it’s for that that I’m here!”
“I think anyone in his place would do the same.”

“And you yourself would do the same?”
“I’m not getting an inheritance, and therefore don’t know about myself.”
“Well, all right,” I said, putting the letter in my pocket. “The matter’s
finished for now. Listen, Kraft. Marya Ivanovna, who, I assure you, has
revealed a lot to me, told me that you and you alone could tell the truth
about what happened in Ems a year and a half ago between Versilov and the
Akhmakovs. I’ve been waiting for you like a sun that would light up
everything for me. You don’t know my position, Kraft. I beseech you to tell
me the whole truth. I precisely want to know what kind of man he is, and
now—now I need it more than ever!”
“I’m surprised that Marya Ivanovna didn’t tell you everything herself;
she could have heard all about it from the late Andronikov and, naturally,
has heard and knows maybe more than I do.”
“Andronikov himself was unclear about the matter, that’s precisely what
Marya Ivanovna says. It seems nobody can clear it up. The devil would
break a leg here! I know, though, that you were in Ems yourself then . . .”
“I didn’t witness all of it, but what I know I’ll willingly tell you, if you
like—only will that satisfy you?”

II
I WON’T QUOTE his story word for word, but will give only the brief
essence of it.
A year and a half ago, Versilov, having become a friend of the
Akhmakovs’ house through old Prince Sokolsky (they were all abroad then,
in Ems), made a strong impression, first, on Akhmakov himself, a general
and not yet an old man, but who, in the space of three years of marriage,
had lost all the rich dowry of his wife, Katerina Nikolaevna, at cards, and
had already had a stroke from his intemperate life. He had recovered from it
and was convalescing abroad, but was living in Ems for the sake of his
daughter from his first marriage. She was a sickly girl of about seventeen,

who suffered from a weak chest, and was said to be extremely beautiful, but
at the same time also fantastical. She had no dowry; hopes were placed, as
usual, in the old prince. Katerina Nikolaevna was said to be a good
stepmother. But the girl, for some reason, became especially attached to
Versilov. He was then preaching “something passionate,” in Kraft’s
expression, some new life, “was in a religious mood in the loftiest sense”—
in the strange, and perhaps also mocking, expression of Andronikov, which
was reported to me. But, remarkably, everyone soon took a dislike to him.
The general was even afraid of him. Kraft in no way denies the rumor that
Versilov somehow managed to instill it into the sick husband’s mind that
Katerina Nikolaevna was not indifferent to the young Prince Sokolsky (who
had then absented himself from Ems to Paris). And he did it not directly,
but, “as was his wont”—by slander, hints, and various meanderings, “at
which he was a great master,” as Kraft put it. Generally, I will say that Kraft
considered him, and wished to consider him, sooner a crook and a born
intriguer than a man indeed imbued with anything lofty or at least original. I
knew even apart from Kraft that Versilov, who first exercised an
extraordinary influence on Katerina Nikolaevna, gradually went so far as to
break with her. What the whole game consisted of, I could not get from
Kraft, but everyone confirmed the mutual hatred that arose between them
after their friendship. Then a strange circumstance occurred: Katerina
Nikolaevna’s sickly stepdaughter apparently fell in love with Versilov, or
was struck by something in him, or was inflamed by his talk, or I have no
idea what else; but it is known that for some time Versilov spent almost
every day near this girl. It ended with the girl suddenly announcing to her
father that she wished to marry Versilov. That this actually happened,
everyone confirms—Kraft and Andronikov and Marya Ivanovna—and once
even Tatyana Pavlovna let something slip about it in my presence. It was
also affirmed that Versilov himself not only wished but even insisted on
marrying the girl, and that this concord of two dissimilar beings, an old one
and a young one, was mutual. But the father was frightened at the thought;
to the extent that he was turning away from Katerina Nikolaevna, whom he
had formerly loved very much, he had begun almost to idolize his daughter,
especially after his stroke. But the most violent opponent of the possibility
of such a marriage was Katerina Nikolaevna herself. There took place an
extreme number of some sort of secret, extremely unpleasant family

confrontations, arguments, grievances, in short, all kinds of nastiness. The
father finally began to give in, seeing the persistence of his daughter, who
was in love with and “fanaticized” by Versilov—Kraft’s expression. But
Katerina Nikolaevna continued to rebel with implacable hatred. And here
begins the tangle that no one understands. Here, however, is Kraft’s direct
conjecture, based on the given facts, but still only a conjecture.
Versilov supposedly managed to instill into the young person, in his own
way, subtly and irrefutably, that the reason why Katerina Nikolaevna would
not consent was that she was in love with him herself and had long been
tormenting him with her jealousy, pursuing him, intriguing, had already
made him a declaration, and was now ready to burn him up for loving
another woman—in short, something like that. The worst of it was that he
supposedly also “hinted” it to the father, the husband of the “unfaithful”
wife, explaining that the prince was only an amusement. Naturally, there
began to be real hell in the family. According to some versions, Katerina
Nikolaevna loved her stepdaughter terribly, and now, being slandered
before her, was in despair, to say nothing of her relations with the sick
husband. But then, next to that there exists another version, in which, to my
sorrow, Kraft fully believed, and in which I also believed myself (I had
already heard about all that). It was affirmed (Andronikov is said to have
heard it from Katerina Nikolaevna herself ) that, on the contrary, Versilov,
still earlier, before the beginning of the young girl’s feelings, had offered
Katerina Nikolaevna his love; that she, being his friend, and even in
exaltation over him for some time, though constantly disbelieving and
contradicting him, met this declaration of Versilov’s with extreme hatred
and mocked him venomously. She formally drove him away from her,
because the man had proposed directly that she be his wife, in view of her
husband’s supposedly impending second stroke. Thus Katerina Nikolaevna
must have felt a particular hatred for Versilov when she saw afterwards that
he was openly seeking her stepdaughter’s hand. Marya Ivanovna,
conveying all this to me in Moscow, believed both the one variant and the
other, that is, all of it together: she precisely affirmed that it could all occur
at once, that it was something like la haine dans l’amour,19 an offended
love’s pride on both sides, etc., etc., in short, something in the way of some
most subtle novelistic entanglement, unworthy of any serious and sober-

minded person, and with meanness to boot. But Marya Ivanovna herself had
been stuffed with novels from childhood and read them day and night,
despite her excellent character. As a result, Versilov’s obvious meanness
was displayed, a lie and an intrigue, something black and vile, the more so
in that the end was indeed tragic: they say the poor inflamed girl poisoned
herself with phosphorus matches; however, I don’t know even now whether
this last rumor was accurate; at least they tried their best to stifle it. The girl
was sick for no more than two weeks and then died. The matches thus
remained in doubt, but Kraft firmly believed in them as well. Soon after
that, the girl’s father also died—of grief, they say, which caused a second
stroke, though not before three months had passed. But after the girl’s
funeral, the young Prince Sokolsky, having returned to Ems from Paris,
gave Versilov a slap in the face publicly in the garden, and the latter did not
respond with a challenge; on the contrary, the very next day he appeared at
a promenade as if nothing had happened. It was then that everyone turned
away from him, in Petersburg as well. Versilov, though he continued to
have acquaintances, had them in a totally different circle. His society
acquaintances all accused him, though, incidentally, very few of them knew
all the details; they only knew something about the novelistic death of the
young lady and about the slap. Only two or three persons had possibly full
information; the late Andronikov, who had long had business connections
with the Akhmakovs, and particularly with Katerina Nikolaevna on a
certain matter, knew most of all. But he kept all these secrets even from his
own family, and only revealed something to Kraft and Marya Ivanovna, and
that out of necessity.
“Above all, there’s now a certain document involved,” Kraft concluded,
“which Mme. Akhmakov is extremely afraid of.”
And here is what he told me about that as well.
Katerina Nikolaevna had had the imprudence, while the old prince, her
father, was abroad and had already begun to recover from his fit, to write to
Andronikov in great secret (Katerina Nikolaevna trusted him fully) an
extremely compromising letter. At that time, they say, the recuperating
prince indeed showed an inclination to spend his money and all but throw it

to the winds: while abroad he started buying totally unnecessary but
valuable objects, paintings, vases; gave and donated large sums to God
knows what, even to various institutions there; he almost bought a ruined
estate, encumbered with litigations, from a Russian society squanderer,
sight unseen, for an enormous sum; finally, he seemed indeed to begin
dreaming of marriage. And so, in view of all that, Katerina Nikolaevna,
who never left her father’s side during his illness, sent to Andronikov, as a
lawyer and an “old friend,” the inquiry, “Would it be possible legally to
declare the prince under guardianship or somehow irresponsible; and if so,
what would be the best way to do it without a scandal, so that no one could
accuse anyone and her father’s feelings would be spared, etc., etc.” They
say Andronikov brought her to reason then and advised against it; and
afterwards, when the prince had fully recovered, it was no longer possible
to go back to the idea; but the letter stayed with Andronikov. And now he
dies. Katerina Nikolaevna remembered at once about the letter. If it should
be discovered among the deceased’s papers and get into the hands of the old
prince, he would undoubtedly throw her out for good, disinherit her, and not
give her a kopeck while he lived. The thought that his own daughter had no
faith in his reason, and even wanted to declare him mad, would turn this
lamb into a savage beast. While she, having become a widow, was left
without any means, thanks to her gambler husband, and had only her father
to count on; she fully hoped to get a new dowry from him as rich as the first
one!
Kraft knew very little about the fate of this letter, but he observed that
Andronikov “never tore up necessary papers” and, besides, was a man not
only of broad intelligence, but also of “broad conscience.” (I even marveled
then at such an extraordinarily independent view on the part of Kraft, who
had so loved and respected Andronikov.) But all the same Kraft was certain
that the compromising document had fallen into the hands of Versilov,
through his closeness to Andronikov’s widow and daughters. It was known
that they had presented Versilov at once and dutifully with all the papers the
deceased had left behind. He also knew that Katerina Nikolaevna was
informed that Versilov had the letter, and that this was what she feared,
thinking that Versilov would at once go to the old prince with the letter;
that, having returned from abroad, she had already searched for the letter in

Petersburg, had visited the Andronikovs, and was now continuing to search,
since the hope still remained in her that the letter was perhaps not with
Versilov, and, in conclusion, that she had also gone to Moscow solely with
that aim and had pleaded with Marya Ivanovna there to look among the
papers she had kept. She had found out about Marya Ivanovna’s existence
and her relations with the late Andronikov quite recently, on returning to
Petersburg.
“Do you think she didn’t find it at Marya Ivanovna’s?” I asked, having a
thought of my own.
“If Marya Ivanovna didn’t reveal anything even to you, then maybe she
doesn’t have anything.”
“So you suppose that Versilov has the document?”
“Most likely he does. However, I don’t know, anything is possible,” he
said with visible fatigue.
I stopped questioning him. What was the point? All the main things had
become clear to me, in spite of this unworthy tangle; everything I was
afraid of—had been confirmed.
“That’s all like dreams and delirium,” I said in profound sorrow, and took
my hat.
“Is this man very dear to you?” Kraft asked with visible and great
sympathy, which I read on his face at that moment.
“I anticipated,” I said, “that I wouldn’t learn the full story from you
anyway. Mme. Akhmakov is the one remaining hope. I did have hope in
her. Maybe I’ll go to see her, and maybe not.”
Kraft looked at me in some perplexity.
“Good-bye, Kraft! Why foist yourself on people who don’t want you?
Isn’t it better to break with it all—eh?”

“And then where?” he asked somehow sternly and looking down.
“To yourself, to yourself! Break with it all and go to yourself !”
“To America?”
“To America! To yourself, to yourself alone! That’s the whole of ‘my
idea,’ Kraft!” I said ecstatically.
He looked at me somehow curiously.
“And you have this place: ‘to yourself ’?”
“I do. Good-bye, Kraft. I thank you, and I’m sorry to have troubled you!
In your place, since you’ve got such a Russia in your head, I’d send
everybody to the devil: away with you, scheme, squabble among yourselves
—what is it to me!”
“Stay a while,” he said suddenly, having already seen me to the front
door.
I was a little surprised, went back, and sat down again. Kraft sat down
facing me. We exchanged smiles of some sort, I can see it all as if it were
now. I remember very well that I somehow wondered at him.
“What I like about you, Kraft, is that you’re such a polite man,” I said
suddenly.
“Oh?”
“It’s because I’m rarely able to be polite myself, though I’d like to be
able . . . But then, maybe it’s better that people insult us. At least they
deliver us from the misfortune of loving them.”
“What time of day do you like best?” he asked, obviously not listening.
“What time? I don’t know. I don’t like sunset.”

“Oh?” he said with a sort of special curiosity, but at once lapsed into
thought again.
“Are you going somewhere again?”
“Yes . . . I am.”
“Soon?”
“Soon.”
“Do you really need a revolver to get to Vilno?” I asked without the least
second thought: it didn’t even enter my thoughts! I just asked, because the
revolver flashed there, and I was at pains to find something to talk about.
He turned and looked intently at the revolver.
“No, I just do it out of habit.”
“If I had a revolver, I’d have hidden it somewhere under lock and key.
You know, by God, it’s tempting! Maybe I don’t believe in epidemics of
suicides, but if that sticks up in front of your eyes—really, there are
moments when it might be tempting.”
“Don’t speak of that,” he said, and suddenly got up from his chair.
“I don’t mean me,” I added, also getting up. “I wouldn’t use it. You could
give me three lives—it would still be too little.”
“Live more,” as if escaped from him.
He smiled distractedly and, strangely, walked straight to the front hall, as
if leading me out personally, naturally without knowing what he was doing.
“I wish you all luck, Kraft,” I said, going out to the stairs.
“That may be,” he replied firmly.

“See you later!”
“That also may be.”
I remember his last look at me.

III
SO THIS WAS the man after whom my heart had been throbbing for so
many years! And what had I expected from Kraft, what new information?
When I left Kraft, I had a strong wish to eat; evening was already falling,
and I had not had lunch. I went into a small tavern right there on the
Petersburg side, on Bolshoi Prospect, intending to spend some twenty
kopecks, twenty-five at the most—not for anything would I have allowed
myself to spend more then. I ordered soup and, I remember, having finished
it, I sat looking out the window. The room was full of people; there was a
smell of burnt grease, tavern napkins, and tobacco. It was vile. Above my
head, a voiceless nightingale, glum and brooding, tapped the bottom of its
cage with its beak. The billiard room on the other side of the wall was
noisy, but I sat and thought intensely. The setting sun (why was Kraft
surprised that I didn’t like sunset?) inspired in me some new and
unexpected sensations, quite out of place. I kept imagining my mother’s
gentle look, her dear eyes that had gazed at me so timidly for a whole
month now. Lately I had been very rude at home, mostly to her; I wished to
be rude to Versilov, but, not daring with him, out of my mean habit, I
tormented her. I even thoroughly intimidated her: she often looked at me
with such imploring eyes, when Andrei Petrovich came in, fearing some
outburst from me . . . It was very strange that now, in the tavern, I realized
for the first time that Versilov addressed me familiarly, and she—formally. I
had wondered about it before, and not favorably for her, but here I realized
it somehow particularly—and all sorts of strange thoughts came pouring
into my head one after another. I went on sitting there for a long time, till it
was completely dark. I also thought about my sister . . .

A fateful moment for me. I had to decide at all costs! Can it be that I’m
incapable of deciding? What’s so hard about breaking with them, if on top
of it they don’t want me themselves? My mother and my sister? But I won’t
leave them in any case—whatever turn things take.
It’s true that the appearance of this man in my life, that is, for a moment,
in early childhood, was the fateful push with which my consciousness
began. If he hadn’t come my way then, my mind, my way of thinking, my
fate, would surely have been different, even despite the character fate
determined for me, which I couldn’t have escaped anyway.
But it now turned out that this man was only my dream, my dream since
childhood. I had thought him up that way, but in fact he turned out to be a
different man, who fell far below my fantasy. I had come to a pure man, not
to this one. And why had I fallen in love with him, once and for all, in that
little moment when I saw him while still a child? This “for all” had to go.
Someday, if I find room, I’ll describe our first meeting: it’s a most empty
anecdote, from which precisely nothing could come. But for me a whole
pyramid came from it. I began on that pyramid while still under my child’s
blanket, when, as I was falling asleep, I would weep and dream—about
what?—I myself don’t know. About being abandoned? About being
tormented? But I was tormented only a little, for just two years, while I was
at Touchard’s boarding school, where he tucked me away then and left
forever. After that nobody tormented me; even the contrary, I myself looked
proudly at my comrades. And I can’t stand this orphanhood whining about
itself! There’s no more loathsome role than when orphans, illegitimate
children, all these cast-offs, and generally all this trash, for whom I have not
the slightest drop of pity, suddenly rise up solemnly before the public and
start their pitiful but admonitory whining: “Look at how we’ve been
treated!” I’d thrash all these orphans. Not one of all that vile officialdom
understands that it’s ten times nobler for him to keep silent, and not to
whine, and not deign to complain. And since you’ve started to deign, it
serves you right, love-child. That’s what I think!
But what is ridiculous is not that I used to dream “under the blanket,” but
that I came here for him, once again for this thought-up man, all but

forgetting my main goals. I was coming to help him to smash slander, to
crush his enemies. The document Kraft spoke of, that woman’s letter to
Andronikov, which she is so afraid of, which can smash her life and reduce
her to poverty, and which she supposes to be in Versilov’s possession—this
letter was not in Versilov’s possession, but in mine, sewn into my side
pocket! I had sewn it myself, and no one in the whole world knew of it yet.
That the novelistic Marya Ivanovna, who “had charge” of the document,
found it necessary to turn it over to me and no one else, was merely her
view and her will, and I’m not obliged to explain it; maybe someday I’ll tell
about it by the way; but, being so unexpectedly armed, I could not but be
tempted by the wish to come to Petersburg. Of course, I proposed to help
this man not otherwise than secretly, without showing off or getting excited,
without expecting either his praise or his embraces. And never, never would
I deign to reproach him with anything! And was it his fault that I had fallen
in love with him and made him into a fantastic ideal? Maybe I didn’t even
love him at all! His original mind, his curious character, his intrigues and
adventures of some sort, and the fact that my mother was with him—all
this, I thought, could not stop me now; it was enough that my fantastic doll
was smashed and that I could perhaps not love him anymore. And so, what
was stopping me, what was I stuck on? That was the question. The upshot
of it all was that I was the only stupid one, and nobody else.
But, since I demand honesty of others, I’ll be honest myself: I must
confess that the document sewn into my pocket did not only arouse in me a
passionate desire to fly to Versilov’s aid. That is all too clear to me now,
though even then I already blushed at the thought. I kept imagining a
woman, a proud high-society being, whom I would meet face to face; she
would despise me, laugh at me as at a mouse, not even suspecting that I was
the master of her fate. This thought intoxicated me still in Moscow, and
especially on the train as I was coming here; I’ve already confessed that
above. Yes, I hated this woman, yet I already loved her as my victim, and
this is all true, this was all actually so. But it was all such childishness as I
hadn’t expected even from someone like myself. I’m describing my feelings
at that time, that is, what went through my head as I sat in the tavern under
the nightingale and decided to break with them ineluctably that same
evening. The thought of today’s meeting with this woman suddenly brought

a flush of shame to my face. A disgraceful meeting! A disgraceful and
stupid little impression and—above all—the strongest proof of my inability
to act! It proved simply, as I thought then, that I was unable to hold out
even before the stupidest enticements, whereas I had just told Kraft that I
had “my own place,” my own business, and that if I had three lives, even
that would be too little for me. I had said it proudly. That I had dropped my
idea and gotten drawn into Versilov’s affairs—that could still be excused in
some way; but that I rush from side to side like a startled hare and get
drawn into every trifle, that, of course, was only my own stupidity. What
the deuce pushed me to go to Dergachev’s and pop up with my stupid talk,
if I had long known that I’m unable to tell anything intelligently and
sensibly, and that the most advantageous thing for me is to be silent? And
then some Vasin brings me to reason by saying that I still have “fifty years
of life ahead of me, and so there’s nothing to be upset about.” His objection
is splendid, I agree, and does credit to his indisputable intelligence; it’s
splendid already in that it’s the simplest, and what is simplest is always
understood only in the end, once everything cleverer or stupider has been
tried; but I knew this objection myself even before Vasin; I had deeply
sensed this thought more than three years ago; moreover, “my idea” partly
consists in it. That’s what I was thinking about in the tavern then.
I felt vile when I reached the Semyonovsky quarter that evening, between
seven and eight, weary from walking and thinking. It was already quite
dark, and the weather changed; it was dry, but a nasty Petersburg wind
sprang up at my back, biting and sharp, and blew dust and sand around. So
many sullen faces of simple folk, hurrying back to their corners from work
and trade! Each had his own sullen care on his face, and there was perhaps
not a single common, all-uniting thought in that crowd! Kraft was right:
everybody’s apart. I met a little boy, so little that it was strange that he
could be alone in the street at such an hour; he seemed to have lost his way;
a woman stopped for a moment to listen to him, but understood nothing,
spread her arms, and went on, leaving him alone in the darkness. I went
over to him, but for some reason he suddenly became frightened of me and
ran off. Nearing the house, I decided that I would never go to see Vasin. As
I went up the stairs, I wanted terribly to find them at home alone, without
Versilov, to have time before he came to say something kind to my mother

or my dear sister, to whom I had hardly addressed a single special word for
the whole month. It so happened that he was not at home . . .

IV
AND BY THE WAY: bringing this “new character” on stage in my
“Notes” (I’m speaking of Versilov), I’ll give a brief account of his service
record, which, incidentally, is of no significance. I do it to make things
clearer for the reader, and because I don’t see where I might stick this
record in further on in the story.
He studied at the university, but went into the guards, into a cavalry
regiment. He married Miss Fanariotov and resigned. He went abroad and,
returning, lived in Moscow amidst worldly pleasures. On his wife’s death,
he came to his country estate; here occurred the episode with my mother.
Then for a long time he lived somewhere in the south. During the war with
Europe,20 he again went into military service, but did not get to the Crimea
and never saw action all that while. When the war ended, he resigned, went
abroad, and even took my mother, whom, however, he left in Königsberg.
The poor woman occasionally told with a sort of horror and shaking her
head of how she had lived for a whole six months then, alone as could be,
with a little daughter, not knowing the language, as if in a forest, and in the
end also without any money. Then Tatyana Pavlovna came to fetch her and
took her back to somewhere in Nizhny-Novgorod province. Later Versilov
joined the arbiters of the peace at the first call-up,21 and they say he
performed his duties splendidly; but he soon quit and in Petersburg began to
occupy himself with conducting various private civil suits. Andronikov
always thought highly of his capacities, respected him very much, and said
only that he didn’t understand his character. Later he also dropped that and
went abroad again, this time for a long period, for several years. Then
began his especially close connections with old Prince Sokolsky. During all
this time his financial means underwent two or three radical changes: first
he fell into poverty, then he suddenly got rich and rose again.
But anyhow, now that I’ve brought my notes precisely to this point, I’ve
decided to tell about “my idea” as well. I’ll describe it in words for the first

time since its conception. I’ve decided to, so to speak, disclose it to the
reader, also for the clarity of the further account. And not only the reader,
but I myself am beginning to get entangled in the difficulty of explaining
my steps without explaining what led me and prompted me to them.
Because of this “figure of omission,” I, in my lack of skill, have fallen back
into those novelistic “beauties” that I myself derided above. On entering the
door of my Petersburg novel, with all my disgraceful adventures in it, I find
this preface necessary. But it was not “beauties” that tempted me to
omission up to now, but also the essence of the matter, that is, the difficulty
of the matter; even now, when all the past has already passed, I feel an
insurmountable difficulty in telling about this “thought.” Besides that, I
undoubtedly should explain it in the form it had then, that is, in the way it
took shape and conceived itself in me at that time, and not now, and that is a
new difficulty. It’s almost impossible to tell about certain things. Precisely
those ideas that are the simplest, the clearest—precisely those are also hard
to understand. If Columbus, before the discovery of America, had started
telling his idea to others, I’m sure he wouldn’t have been understood for a
terribly long time. And in fact he wasn’t. In saying this, I have no thought
of equating myself with Columbus, and if anybody concludes that, he
should be ashamed, that’s all.

Chapter Five
I
MY IDEA IS—to become Rothschild. I invite the reader to calmness and
seriousness.
I repeat: my idea is to become Rothschild, to become as rich as
Rothschild; not simply rich, but precisely like Rothschild. Why, what for,
precisely what goals I pursue—of that I shall speak later. First, I shall
merely prove that the achievement of my goal is mathematically assured.
The matter is very simple, the whole secret lies in two words: persistence
and continuity.
“We’ve heard all that,” I’ll be told, “it’s nothing new. Every Vater in
Germany repeats it to his children, and yet your Rothschild” (that is, the late
James Rothschild, the Parisian, he’s the one I’m speaking of ) “was only
one, while there are millions of Vaters.”
I would answer:
“You assure me that you’ve heard it all, and yet you haven’t heard
anything. True, you’re also right about one thing: if I said that this was a
‘very simple’ matter, I forgot to add that it’s also the most difficult. All the
religions and moralities in the world come down to one thing: ‘We must
love virtue and flee from vice.’ What, it seems, could be simpler? So go and
do something virtuous and flee from at least one of your vices, give it a try
—eh? It’s the same here.”
That’s why your countless Vaters in the course of countless ages can
repeat these two astonishing words, which make up the whole secret, and
yet Rothschild remains alone. Which means it’s the same and not the same,
and the Vaters are repeating quite a different thought.

No doubt they, too, have heard about persistence and continuity; but to
achieve my goal, it’s not Vater persistence and Vater continuity that are
needed.
Already this one word, that he’s a Vater—I’m not speaking only of
Germans—that he has a family, that he lives like everybody else, has
expenses like everybody else, has duties like everybody else—here you
don’t become Rothschild, but remain only a moderate man. I understand all
too clearly that, having become Rothschild, or even only wishing to become
him, not in a Vater-like way, but seriously—I thereby at once step outside of
society.
A few years ago I read in the newspapers that on the Volga, on one of the
steamboats, a certain beggar died, who had gone about in tatters, begging
for alms, and was known to everybody there. After his death, they found as
much as three thousand in banknotes sewn into his rags. The other day I
again read about a certain beggar, from the nobility, who went around the
taverns hat in hand. They arrested him and found as much as five thousand
roubles on him. Two conclusions follow directly from this: first, persistence
in accumulating, even by kopecks, produces enormous results later on (time
means nothing here); and, second, that the most unsophisticated but
continuous form of gain mathematically assures success.
And yet there are people, perhaps quite a few of them, who are
respectable, intelligent, and restrained, but who (no matter how they try) do
not have either three or five thousand, but who nevertheless want terribly
much to have it. Why is that so? The answer is clear: because, despite all
their wanting, not one of them wants to such a degree, for instance, as to
become a beggar, if there’s no other way of getting money; or is persistent
to such a degree, even having become a beggar, as not to spend the very
first kopecks he gets on an extra crust for himself or his family. And yet,
with this method of accumulation, that is, with begging, one has to eat
nothing but bread and salt in order to save so much money; at least that’s
my understanding. That is surely what the two above-mentioned beggars
did, that is, ate nothing but bread and lived all but under the open sky. There
is no doubt that they had no intention of becoming Rothschild: these were

Harpagons or Plyushkins22 in the purest form, nothing more; but conscious
money-making in a completely different form, and with the goal of
becoming Rothschild, will call for no less wanting and strength of will than
with these two beggars. A Vater won’t show such strength. There is a great
diversity of strengths in the world, strengths of will and wanting especially.
There is the temperature of boiling water, and there is the temperature of
red-hot iron.
Here it’s the same as a monastery, the same ascetic endeavor. Here’s it’s a
feeling, not an idea. What for? Why? Is it moral, and is it not ugly, to go
about in sackcloth and eat black bread all your life, while carrying such
huge money on you? These questions are for later, but now I’m only talking
about the possibility of achieving the goal.
When I thought up “my idea” (and it consists of red-hot iron), I began
testing myself: am I capable of the monastery and asceticism? To that end I
spent the whole first month eating nothing but bread and water. It came to
no more than two and a half pounds of black bread a day. To carry it out, I
had to deceive the clever Nikolai Semyonovich and the well-wishing Marya
Ivanovna. I insisted, to her distress and to a certain perplexity in the most
delicate Nikolai Semyonovich, that dinner be brought to my room. There I
simply destroyed it: the soup I poured out the window into the nettles or a
certain other place, the beef I either threw out the window to the dog, or
wrapped in paper, put in my pocket, and took out later, well, and all the rest.
Since they served much less than two and a half pounds of bread for dinner,
I bought myself more bread on the sly. I held out for that month, only I may
have upset my stomach somewhat; but the next month I added soup to the
bread, and drank a glass of tea in the morning and evening—and, I assure
you, I spent a whole year that way in perfect health and contentment, and
morally—in rapture and continuous secret delight. Not only did I not regret
the meals, I was in ecstasy. By the end of the year, having made sure that I
was able to endure any fast you like, I began to eat as they did and went
back to having dinner with them. Not satisfied with this test, I made a
second one: apart from my upkeep, which was paid to Nikolai
Semyonovich, I was allocated a monthly sum of five roubles for pocket
money. I decided to spend only half of it. This was a very hard test, but in a

little over two years, when I came to Petersburg, I had in my pocket, apart
from other money, seventy roubles saved up solely by this economy. The
result of these two experiments was tremendous for me: I learned positively
that I was able to want enough to achieve my goal, and that, I repeat, is the
whole of “my idea.” The rest is all trifles.

II
HOWEVER, LET US examine the trifles as well.
I have described my two experiments; in Petersburg, as is already known,
I made a third—went to the auction and, at one stroke, made a profit of
seven roubles, ninety-five kopecks. Of course, that wasn’t a real
experiment, but just a game, for fun: I wanted to steal a moment from the
future and experience how I would go about and behave. But generally, still
at the very beginning, in Moscow, I postponed the real setting out in
business until I was completely free; I understood only too well that I at
least had, for instance, to finish high school first. (I sacrificed the university,
as is already known.) Indisputably, I went to Petersburg with repressed
wrath: I had just finished high school and become free for the first time,
when I suddenly saw that Versilov’s affairs would again distract me from
starting business for an unknown period! But though I was wrathful, I still
went completely at ease about my goal.
True, I knew nothing of practical life; but I had been thinking it over for
three years on end and could not have any doubts. I had imagined a
thousand times how I would set about it: I suddenly turn up, as if dropped
from the sky, in one of our two capitals23 (I chose to begin with our
capitals, and namely with Petersburg, to which, by a certain reckoning, I
gave preference), and so, I’ve dropped from the sky, but am completely
free, not dependent on anybody, healthy, and have a hundred roubles hidden
in my pocket for an initial working capital. It’s impossible to begin without
a hundred roubles, otherwise the very first period of success would be
delayed for too long. Besides a hundred roubles, I have, as is already
known, courage, persistence, continuity, total solitude, and secrecy. Solitude
is the main thing: I terribly disliked till the very last minute any contact or

association with people; generally speaking, I decided absolutely to begin
the “idea” alone, that was sine qua. People are a burden to me, and I would
be troubled in spirit, which would harm my goal. And generally all my life
till now, in all my dreams of how I would deal with people—I always have
it come out very intelligent; as soon as it’s in reality—it’s always very
stupid. And I confess this with indignation and sincerely, I have always
betrayed myself with words and hurried, and therefore I resolved to cancel
people. The gain was independence, peace of mind, clarity of goal.
Despite the terrible Petersburg prices, I determined once and for all that I
would not spend more than fifteen kopecks on food, and I knew I would
keep my word. I had pondered this question of food thoroughly and for a
long time; I proposed, for instance, to eat only bread and salt for two days
in a row, so as to spend the money saved in two days on the third day; it
seemed to me that it would be more profitable for my health than an
eternally regular fast on the minimum of fifteen kopecks. Then I needed a
corner to live in, literally a corner, only to have a good night’s sleep or take
refuge on a particularly nasty day. I proposed to live in the street, and if
necessary I was prepared to sleep in night shelters, where, on top of a
night’s lodging, they give you a piece of bread and a glass of tea. Oh, I’d be
only too able to hide my money, so that it wouldn’t be stolen in my corner
or in the shelter; they wouldn’t even catch a glimpse of it, I promise you!
“Steal from me? No, the real fear is that I’ll steal from them!”—I heard this
merry phrase once from some rascal in the street. Of course, I apply only
the prudence and cunning to myself, and have no intention of stealing.
Moreover, still in Moscow, maybe from the very first day of the “idea,” I
decided that I would not be a pawnbroker or a usurer: there are Yids for
that, and those Russians who lack both intelligence and character.
Pawnbroking and usury are for mediocrities.
As for clothes, I proposed to have two outfits: an everyday one and a
decent one. Once I had them, I was sure I’d wear them for a long time; I
purposely spent two and a half years learning how to wear clothes and even
discovered a secret: for suits to stay always new and not wear out, they
should be cleaned with a brush as often as possible, five or six times a day.
Cloth has no fear of the brush, believe me, what it fears is dust and dirt.

Dust is the same as stones, looked at under a microscope, while even the
stiffest brush is, after all, almost wool itself. I also learned how to wear
boots evenly: the secret is that you must carefully put your foot down with
the whole sole at once, avoiding as far as possible bringing it down on the
side. It can be learned in two weeks, after which it becomes unconscious. In
this way boots can be worn, on the average, one-third longer. Two years’
experience.
Then the activity itself begins.
I started from this consideration: I have a hundred roubles. In Petersburg
there are so many auctions, sales, small shops at flea markets, and people in
need of things, that it’s impossible, once you’ve bought an object for suchand-such a price, not to sell it for a little more. With the album I made a
profit of seven roubles, ninety-five kopecks on a capital expenditure of two
roubles, five kopecks. This enormous profit was taken without risk: I saw
from his eyes that the buyer wouldn’t back out. Naturally, I understand very
well that it was mere chance: but those are the kinds of chances I seek,
that’s why I decided to live in the street. Well, granted such chances may
even be extremely rare; all the same, my main rule will be not to risk
anything, and the second—to be sure to earn at least something each day
over and above the minimum spent on my subsistence, so that the
accumulation doesn’t stop for a single day.
They’ll tell me: these are all dreams, you don’t know the street, and
you’ll be cheated from the first step. But I have will and character, and
street science is a science like any other, it yields to persistence, attention,
and ability. In high school I was among the first right up to the final grade; I
was very good at mathematics. Well, as if experience and street science
should be extolled to such an idolizing degree as to predict certain failure!
The only ones who say it are always those who have never experimented
with anything, never started any life, and went on vegetating with
everything provided. “If one gets his nose smashed, another will do the
same.” No, I won’t get my nose smashed. I have character, and with my
attentiveness, I’ll learn everything. Well, is it possible to imagine that with
constant persistence, constant keen-sightedness, and constant reflection and

calculation, with boundless activity and running around, you will not attain
finally to a knowledge of how to earn an extra twenty kopecks a day?
Above all, I decided never to aim at the maximum profit, but always to
remain calm. Later on, once I’ve already made a thousand or two, I will, of
course, inevitably get out of trading and street dealing. Of course, I still
know very little about the stock exchange, shares, banking, and all the rest.
But, instead of that, I know, like the back of my hand, that in my own time
I’ll learn and master all this exchanging and banking like nobody else, and
that this study will come quite easily to me, merely because matters will
reach that point. Does it take so much intelligence? Is it some kind of
wisdom of Solomon? All I need is character; skill, adroitness, knowledge
will come by themselves. So long as I don’t stop “wanting.”
Above all, take no risks, and that is precisely possible only with
character. Just recently, when I was already in Petersburg, there was a
subscription for railway shares; those who managed to subscribe made a lot.
For some time the shares were going up. And then suppose, suddenly,
somebody who didn’t manage to subscribe, or just turned greedy, seeing me
with the shares in my hand, offered to buy them from me, with a premium
of so much percent. Why, I’d certainly sell them to him at once. They’d
start laughing at me, of course, saying: if you’d waited, you would have
made ten times more. Right, sirs, but my premium is more certain, since it’s
already in my pocket, while yours is still flying around. They’ll say you
can’t make much that way; excuse me, but there’s your mistake, the mistake
of all these Kokorevs, Polyakovs, Gubonins.24 Know the truth: constancy
and persistence in making money and, above all, in accumulating it, are
stronger than momentary profits, even of a hundred percent!
Not long before the French Revolution, a man named Law25 appeared in
Paris and undertook a project that was brilliant in principle (afterwards, in
fact, it crashed terribly). All Paris was astir; Law’s shares were snapped up,
there was a stampede. Money came pouring from all over Paris, as if from a
sack, into the house where the subscription was announced; but the house,
finally, was not enough: the public crowded in the street—all estates,
conditions, ages; bourgeois, nobility, their children, countesses, marquises,
public women—everything churned up into a raging, half-crazed mass of

people bitten by a rabid dog; ranks, prejudices of breeding and pride, even
honor and good name—everything was trampled in the same mud;
everyone sacrificed (even women) in order to obtain a few shares. The
subscription finally passed into the street, but there was nowhere to write.
Here one hunchback was asked to lend his hump for a time, as a table for
subscribing to shares. The hunchback accepted—you can imagine for what
price! Some time later (very little), it all went bankrupt, it all crashed, the
idea went to the devil, and the shares lost all value. Who profited? Only the
hunchback, precisely because he did not take shares, but cash in louis d’ors.
Well, sirs, I am that very same hunchback! Didn’t I have strength enough
not to eat and to save up seventy-two roubles out of kopecks? I’ll also have
enough to restrain myself, right in the whirl of the fever that overcomes
everybody, to prefer sure money to big money. I’m trifling only in trifles,
but in great things I’m not. I often lacked the character for a small
forbearance, even after the “idea” was born, but for a big one I’ll always
have enough. When my mother served me cold coffee in the morning
before I went to work, I got angry and was rude to her, and yet I was the
same man who survived a whole month on nothing but bread and water.
In short, not to make money, not to learn how to make money, would be
unnatural. It would also be unnatural, with continuous and regular
accumulation, with continuous attention and sobermindedness, restraint,
economy, with ever-increasing energy, it would be unnatural, I repeat, not to
become a millionaire. How did the beggar make his money, if not by
fanaticism of character and persistence? Am I worse than that beggar?
“And, finally, suppose I don’t achieve anything, suppose my calculation is
wrong, suppose I crash and fail—all the same, I’m going. I’m going
because I want it that way.” That’s what I said still in Moscow.
They’ll tell me there’s no “idea” here, and precisely nothing new. But I
say, and for the last time now, that there’s incalculably much idea and
infinitely much that’s new.
Oh, I did anticipate how trivial all the objections would be, and how
trivial I myself would be, explaining the “idea”: well, what have I said? I

didn’t say even a hundredth part; I feel that it came out petty, crude,
superficial, and even somehow younger than my years.

III
IT REMAINS TO answer the “what for” and “why,” the “moral or not,”
and so on, and so forth. I’ve promised to answer that.
I feel sad to disappoint the reader at once, sad but glad as well. Be it
known that the goals of my “idea” have absolutely no feeling of “revenge,”
nothing “Byronic”—no curse, no orphaned complaints, no tears of
illegitimacy, nothing, nothing. In short, a romantic lady, if she were to come
across my “Notes,” would be crestfallen at once. The whole goal of my
“idea” is—solitude.
“But one can achieve solitude without any bristling up about becoming
Rothschild. What has Rothschild got to do with it?”
“Just this, that, besides solitude, I also need power.”
I’ll preface that. The reader will perhaps be horrified at the frankness of
my confession and will ask himself simpleheartedly: how is it that the
author doesn’t blush? I reply that I’m not writing for publication; I’ll
probably have a reader only in some ten years, when everything is already
so apparent, past and proven, that there will no longer be any point in
blushing. And therefore, if I sometimes address the reader in my notes, it’s
merely a device. My reader is a fantastic character.
No, it was not the illegitimacy for which they taunted me so much at
Touchard’s, not my sad childhood years, not revenge or the right to protest
that was the beginning of my “idea”; my character alone is to blame for it
all. From the age of twelve, I think, that is, almost from the birth of proper
consciousness, I began not to like people. Not so much not to like, but they
somehow became oppressive to me. It was sometimes all too sad for me
myself, in my pure moments, that I could in no way speak everything out
even to those close to me, that is, I could, but I didn’t want to, I restrained

myself for some reason; that I was mistrustful, sullen, and unsociable. Then,
too, I had long noticed a feature in myself, almost from childhood, that I all
too often accuse others, that I’m all too inclined to accuse them; but this
inclination was quite often followed immediately by another thought, which
was all too oppressive for me: “Is it not I myself who am to blame, instead
of them?” And how often I accused myself in vain! To avoid resolving such
questions, I naturally sought solitude. Besides, I never found anything in the
company of people, however I tried, and I did try; at least all my peers, all
my comrades to a man, proved to be inferior to me in thinking; I don’t
remember a single exception.
Yes, I’m glum, I’m continually closed. I often want to leave society. I
may also do good to people, but often I don’t see the slightest reason for
doing good to them. And people are not at all so beautiful that they should
be cared for so much. Why don’t they come forward directly and openly,
and why is it so necessary that I should go and foist myself on them? That’s
what I asked myself. I’m a grateful being, and I’ve already proved it by a
hundred follies. I would instantly respond with openness to an open person
and begin to love him at once. And so I did; but they all cheated me at once
and closed themselves to me in mockery. The most open of them was
Lambert, who used to beat me badly in childhood; but he, too, was merely
an open scoundrel and robber; and here, too, his openness came merely
from stupidity. These were my thoughts when I came to Petersburg.
Having left Dergachev’s then (God knows what pushed me to go there), I
approached Vasin and, on a rapturous impulse, praised him to the skies.
And what then? That same evening I already felt that I liked him much less.
Why? Precisely because, by praising him, I had lowered myself before him.
Yet it seems it should have been the opposite: a man so just and
magnanimous as to give another his due, even to his own detriment, such a
man is almost superior in his personal dignity to everyone else. And what,
then—I knew this, and still I liked Vasin less, even much less, I purposely
give an example already familiar to the reader. Even Kraft I remembered
with a bitter and sour feeling, because he brought me out to the front hall
himself, and so it remained right up to another day, when everything about
Kraft became perfectly clear and it was impossible to be angry. From the

very lowest grade in school, as soon as any of my comrades got ahead of
me in studies, or in witty answers, or in physical strength, I at once stopped
keeping company with him and speaking to him. Not that I hated him or
wished him to fail; I simply turned away, because such was my character.
Yes, I’ve thirsted for power all my life, power and solitude. I dreamed of
them even at such an age that decidedly anyone would have laughed in my
face if he had made out what I had inside my skull. That is why I came to
love secrecy so much. Yes, I dreamed with all my might and to a point
where I had no time to talk; this led to the conclusion that I was unsociable,
and my absentmindedness led to a still worse conclusion in my regard, but
my rosy cheeks proved the contrary.
I was especially happy when, going to bed and covering myself with a
blanket, I began, alone now, in the most complete solitude, with no people
moving around and not a single sound from them, to re-create life in a
different key. The fiercest dreaming was my companion until I discovered
the “idea,” when all my dreams went at once from stupid to reasonable, and
from a dreamy form of novel passed on to the rationalistic form of reality.
Everything merged into a single goal. However, they weren’t so stupid
even before, though there were myriad upon myriad and thousand upon
thousand of them. But I had some favorites . . . However, there’s no point
bringing them in here.
Power! I’m convinced that a great many people would find it very funny
to learn that such “trash” was aiming at power. But I’ll amaze them still
more: maybe from my very first dreams, that is, almost from my very
childhood, I was unable to imagine myself otherwise than in the first place,
always and in all turns of life. I’ll add a strange confession: maybe that goes
on even to this day. And I’ll also note that I’m not apologizing.
In this lies my “idea,” in this lies its strength, that money is the only path
that will bring even a nonentity to the first place. Maybe I’m not a
nonentity, but I know from the mirror, for instance, that my appearance does
me harm, because my face is ordinary. But if I were as rich as Rothschild—

who would question my face, and wouldn’t thousands of women rush to me
with their charms if I merely whistled? I’m even certain that, in the end,
they themselves would quite sincerely find me handsome. Maybe I’m also
intelligent. But even if I had a forehead seven inches wide, there would
inevitably turn up in society a man with a forehead eight inches wide, and
that would be the end of me. Whereas if I were Rothschild—would this
smarty with the eight-inch forehead mean anything next to me? He
wouldn’t even be allowed to speak next to me! Maybe I’m witty; yet here
next to me is Talleyrand or Piron26—and I’m put in the shade; but once I’m
Rothschild—where is Piron, and maybe even Talleyrand? Money is, of
course, a despotic power, but at the same time it’s also the highest equalizer,
and that is its chief strength. Money equalizes all inequalities. I had already
decided all that in Moscow.
You will, of course, see nothing in this thought but impudence, violence,
the triumph of nonentity over talent. I agree that it’s a bold thought (and
therefore sweet). But so what, so what? Do you think I wished for power
then in order to crush unfailingly, to take revenge? That’s just the point, that
the ordinary man would unfailingly behave that way. Moreover, I’m certain
that if Rothschild’s millions were heaped on them, the thousands of talents
and smarties, who are so above it all, would lose control at once and behave
like the most banal of ordinary men, and crush more than anybody else. My
idea is not that. I’m not afraid of money; it won’t crush me and won’t make
me crush others.
I don’t need money, or, better, it’s not money that I need; it’s not even
power; I need only what is obtained by power and simply cannot be
obtained without power: the solitary and calm awareness of strength! That
is the fullest definition of freedom, which the world so struggles over!
Freedom! I have finally inscribed that great word . . . Yes, the solitary
awareness of strength is fascinating and beautiful. I have strength, and I am
calm. Jupiter holds thunder-bolts in his hand, and what then? He’s calm. Do
we often hear him thunder? A fool might think he was asleep. But put some
writer or foolish peasant woman in Jupiter’s place—oh, what thunder, what
thunder there will be!

If only I had power, I reasoned, I’d have no need at all to use it; I assure
you that I myself, of my own free will, would take the last place
everywhere. If I were Rothschild, I’d go about in an old coat and carry an
umbrella. What do I care if I’m jostled in the street, if I’m forced to go
skipping through the mud so as not to be run over by cabs? The awareness
that it was I, Rothschild himself, would even amuse me at that moment. I
know that I can have a dinner like nobody else, and from the world’s
foremost chef, and it’s enough for me that I know it. I’ll eat a piece of bread
and ham and be satisfied with my awareness. I think so even now.
It’s not I who will get in with the aristocracy, but they who will get in
with me; it’s not I who will chase after women, but they who will flow to
me like water, offering me everything a woman can offer. The “banal” ones
will come running for money, but the intelligent ones will be drawn by
curiosity to a strange, proud, closed being, indifferent to everything. I’ll be
nice to the ones and to the others, and maybe give them money, but I won’t
take anything from them myself. Curiosity gives rise to passion, maybe I’ll
also inspire passion. They’ll go away with nothing, I assure you, except
perhaps a few presents. I’ll only become twice as curious for them.
... enough for me
Is the awareness of it.27
The strange thing is that this picture (a correct one, by the way) tempted
me when I was no more than seventeen.
I don’t want to crush or torment anyone and I won’t; but I know that if I
did want to ruin such-and-such a person, my enemy, no one would keep me
from doing it, but everyone would be obliging; and again, enough. I
wouldn’t even take revenge on anyone. I was always surprised at how
James Rothschild could agree to become a baron! Why, what for, when he’s
superior to everyone in the world without that? “Oh, let this insolent general
offend me at the posting station, where we’re both waiting for horses; if he
knew who I was, he’d run to hitch them up himself and jump out and hasten
to seat me in my modest tarantass! They wrote that a certain foreign count
or baron, at a certain Viennese railway station, before the public, helped a

certain local banker into his shoes, and the man was so ordinary that he
allowed it. Oh, let her, let this fearsome beauty (precisely fearsome, there
are such!)—the daughter of this magnificent and high-born aristocratic lady,
having met me by chance on a steamboat or wherever, look askance and,
turning up her nose, wonder scornfully how this humble and puny little man
with a newspaper or book in his hands could dare to show up beside her in
first class! But if she only knew who was sitting next to her! And she will
know—she will know, and will sit down next to me, obedient, timid, gentle,
seeking my eyes, glad of my smile . . .” I have purposely introduced these
early pictures in order to express my idea more vividly, but the pictures are
pale and perhaps trivial. Reality alone justifies everything.
They’ll say it’s stupid to live like that. Why not have a mansion, an open
house, gather society, exert influence, get married? But what would
Rothschild be then? He’d become like everybody else. All the charm of the
“idea” would vanish, all its moral force. As a child I had already learned by
heart the monologue of Pushkin’s covetous knight; Pushkin never produced
a higher idea than that! I’m also of the same mind now.
“But your ideal is too low,” they’ll say with scorn. “Money, riches! A far
cry from social usefulness and humane endeavors!”
But who knows how I’ll use my riches? What is immoral, what is low, in
having these millions flow out of a multitude of dirty and pernicious Jewish
hands, into the hands of a sober and firm ascetic, who keenly studies the
world? Generally, all these dreams of the future, all these conjectures—all
this is still like a novel now, and maybe I shouldn’t be writing it down; it
should have stayed inside my skull; I also know that maybe no one will
read these lines; but if anyone does, would he believe that maybe I, too, was
unable to endure the Rothschildian millions? Not because they would crush
me, but in quite a different sense, the opposite. In my dreams, I had more
than once seized on that moment in the future when my consciousness
would be too well satisfied and power would seem all too little. Then—not
from boredom, and not from aimless anguish, but because I will desire
something boundlessly greater—I will give all my millions away to people;
let society distribute all my riches, and I—I will once more mingle with

nonentity! Maybe I’ll even turn into that beggar who died on the steamboat,
with this difference, that they won’t find anything sewn into my rags. The
awareness alone that I had had millions in my hands and had flung them
into the mud, would feed me in my wilderness like a raven.28 I’m prepared
to think so even now. Yes, my “idea” is that fortress in which I can always
and in any case hide from all people, be it even like the beggar who died on
the steamboat. This is my poem! And know that I need precisely my whole
depraved will—solely to prove to myself that I’m strong enough to
renounce it.
They’ll undoubtedly object that this is poetry, and that I’ll never let go of
millions, if I’ve got them, and will not turn into a Saratov beggar. Maybe I
won’t let go; I’ve merely traced out the ideal of my thought. But I’ll add
seriously now: if, in the accumulation of wealth, I should reach the same
figure as Rothschild, then it might indeed end with my flinging it to society.
(However, it would be hard to do that before the Rothschildian figure.) And
I wouldn’t give away half, because then it would be nothing but a banality:
I’d only become twice poorer and nothing more; but precisely all, all to the
last kopeck, because, having become a beggar, I’d suddenly become twice
as rich as Rothschild! If they don’t understand that, it’s not my fault; I
won’t explain.
“Fakirism, the poetry of nonentity and impotence,” people will decide,
“the triumph of untalentedness and mediocrity!” Yes, I admit that it’s partly
the triumph of both untalentedness and mediocrity, but hardly of impotence.
I liked terribly to imagine a being, precisely an untalented and mediocre
one, standing before the world and telling it with a smile: you are Galileos
and Copernicuses, Charlemagnes and Napoleons, you are Pushkins and
Shakespeares, you are field marshals and hofmarshals, and here I am—
giftlessness and illegitimacy, and all the same I’m superior to you, because
you submit to it yourselves. I confess, I’ve pushed this fantasy to such a
verge that I’ve even ruled out education. It seemed to me that it would be
more beautiful if this person was even filthily uneducated. This already
exaggerated dream even influenced my results then in the final grade of
high school; I stopped studying precisely out of fanaticism: it was as if lack

of education added beauty to the ideal. Now I’ve changed my convictions
on this point; education doesn’t hurt.
Gentlemen, can it be that independence of mind, even the least bit of it, is
so painful for you? Blessed is he who has his ideal of beauty, even if it’s a
mistaken one! But I believe in mine. Only I’ve explained it improperly,
clumsily, primitively. Ten years from now, of course, I’ll explain it better.
And this I’ll keep as a memento.

IV
I’VE FINISHED THE “idea.” If the description is banal, superficial—I’m
to blame, and not the “idea.” I’ve already warned you that the simplest
ideas are the hardest to understand; I’ll now add that they are also the
hardest to explain, the more so as I’ve described the “idea” still in its former
shape. There is also an inverse law for ideas: banal, hasty ideas are
understood extraordinarily quickly, and invariably by a crowd, invariably
by the whole street; moreover, they are considered the greatest and most
brilliant, but only on the day of their appearance. What’s cheap is not
durable. Quick understanding is only a sign of the banality of what is
understood. Bismarck’s idea was instantly regarded as brilliant, and
Bismarck himself as a brilliant man;29 but this quickness is precisely
suspicious: I wait for Bismarck ten years from now, and then we’ll see
what’s left of his idea, and maybe of Mr. Chancellor himself. Of course, I
haven’t introduced this highly extraneous and inappropriate observation for
the sake of comparison, but also as a reminder. (An explanation for the
overly crude reader.)
And now I’ll tell two anecdotes, so as to finish with the “idea” altogether,
and not have it interfere in any way with the story.
In the summer, in July, two months before I came to Petersburg, and
when I was already completely free, Marya Ivanovna asked me to go to
Troitsky Posad to see a certain old maid who had settled there, on an errand
too uninteresting to mention in detail. Coming back that same day, I noticed
a certain puny young man on the train, not badly but uncleanly dressed,

with blackheads, a dark-haired, dirtily swarthy type. He was distinguished
by the fact that, at every station, large or small, he unfailingly got off and
drank vodka. By the end of the journey, a merry little circle had formed
around him—an utterly trashy company, incidentally. There was a
shopkeeper, also slightly drunk, who was especially admiring of the young
man’s ability to drink continuously while remaining sober. There was yet
another very pleased young fellow, terribly stupid and terribly talkative,
dressed in German fashion, who gave off a rather nasty smell—a lackey, as
I learned later; this one even struck up a friendship with the drinking young
man and, each time the train stopped, got him to his feet with the invitation,
“Time now for some vodka”—and the two would go out in each other’s
embrace. The drinking young man hardly said a word, but more and more
interlocutors sat down around him; he merely listened to them all, grinning
continuously with a slobbery titter and producing from time to time, but
always unexpectedly, a sort of sound like “tir-lir-li!” and placing a finger on
his nose in a very caricaturish way. It was this that delighted the merchant,
and the lackey, and all of them, and they laughed extremely loudly and
casually. It’s impossible to understand why people laugh sometimes. I, too,
went over—and I don’t understand why I also found this young man
likable, as it were; maybe by his all-too-spectacular violation of
conventional and banalized proprieties; in short, I failed to discern the fool
in him; anyhow, we were on familiar terms there and then, and as we got off
the train, I learned from him that he would be coming to Tverskoy
Boulevard that evening after eight. He turned out to be a former student. I
went to the boulevard, and here’s what trick he taught me: we went around
all the boulevards together, and later on, the moment we spotted a woman
of a decent sort walking along, but so that there was no public close by,
we’d immediately start pestering her. Without saying a word to her, we’d
place ourselves, he on one side, I on the other, and with the most calm air,
as if not noticing her at all, would begin a most indecent conversation
between ourselves. We called things by their real names with a most
unperturbed air, as if it was quite proper, and went into such details,
explaining various vile and swinish things, as the dirtiest imagination of the
dirtiest debaucher could not have thought up. (I, of course, had already
acquired all this knowledge at school, even before high school, but only in
words, not in deeds.) The woman would be very frightened and hurriedly

walk away, but we would also quicken our pace and—go on with our thing.
For the victim, of course, it was impossible to do anything; she couldn’t
shout: there were no witnesses, and it would somehow be strange to
complain. Some eight days were spent on these amusements; I don’t
understand how I could have liked it; and in fact I didn’t like it, I just did it.
At first I found it original, as if it went outside everyday trite conventions;
besides, I can’t stand women. I once told the student that Jean-Jacques
Rousseau admits in his Confessions30 that, as a youth, he liked to expose
himself on the sly, from around the corner, uncovering the usually covered
parts of the body, and waited like that for passing women. The student
answered me with his tir-lir-li. I noticed that he was frightfully ignorant and
interested in surprisingly little. There was no trace of the hidden idea I had
hoped to find in him. Instead of originality, I found only an overwhelming
monotony. I disliked him more and more. Finally it all ended quite
unexpectedly. Once when it was already quite dark, we began to pester a
girl who was walking quickly and timidly down the boulevard, a very
young girl, maybe only sixteen or even less, dressed very neatly and
modestly, who maybe lived by her own labor and was going home from
work to her old mother, a poor widow with children; however, there’s no
need to fall into sentimentality. The girl listened for some time, walking
faster and faster, her head lowered and her face covered by a veil, afraid and
trembling, but suddenly she stopped, threw back the veil from her very
pretty, as far as I remember, but thin face, and with flashing eyes cried to
us:
“Ah, what scoundrels you are!”
Maybe she would also have burst into tears here, but something else
happened: she swung her small, skinny arm and planted a slap on the
student’s face, than which a more deft has maybe never been given. What a
smack! He cursed and rushed at her, but I held him back, and the girl had
time to run away. Left there, we began quarreling at once. I told him
everything that had been smoldering in me all that time; I said he was
nothing but a pathetic giftlessness and ordinariness, and that there had never
been the least sign of an idea in him. He called me a . . . (I had explained to
him once about my being illegitimate), then we spat at each other, and I’ve

never seen him since. That evening I was very vexed, the next day less so,
the third day I almost forgot all about it. And so, though I sometimes
remembered this girl afterwards, it was just by chance and fleetingly. It was
only on arriving in Petersburg some two weeks later that I suddenly
remembered that whole scene—remembered, and then felt so ashamed that
tears of shame literally poured down my cheeks. I suffered all evening, all
night, I’m partly suffering now as well. I couldn’t understand at first how it
had been possible to fall so low and disgracefully then, and above all—to
forget the incident, not to be ashamed of it, not to be repentant. Only now
did I realize what was the matter: the “idea” was to blame. In short, I draw
the direct conclusion that if you have in mind something fixed, perpetual,
strong, something terribly preoccupying, it is as if you thereby withdraw
from the whole world into a desert, and everything that happens takes place
in passing, apart from the main thing. Even impressions are received
wrongly. And besides that, the main thing is that you always have an
excuse. However much I tormented my mother all that time, however much
I neglected my sister: “Ah, I have my ‘idea,’ those are all trifles”—that’s
what I seemed to say to myself. I’d get insulted myself, and painfully—I’d
go out insulted and then suddenly say to myself, “Ah, I’m base, but all the
same I have an ‘idea,’ and they don’t know about it.” The “idea” comforted
me in my disgrace and nonentity; but all my abominations were also as if
hiding under the idea; it eased everything, so to speak, but it also clouded
everything over before me; and such a blurred understanding of events and
things may, of course, even harm the “idea” itself, to say nothing of the rest.
Now the other anecdote.
On the first of April last year, Marya Ivanovna had a name-day party. In
the evening some guests came, a very few. Suddenly Agrafena comes in,
breathless, and announces that there’s a foundling baby squealing in the
entry, by the kitchen door, and that she doesn’t know what to do. Excited by
the news, we all went and saw a basket, and in the basket a three- or fourweek-old squealing girl. I took the basket, brought it to the kitchen, and at
once found a folded note: “Dear benefactors, render your well-wishing aid
to the baptized girl Arina, and with her we will ever send up our tears to the
throne of God for you, and we congratulate you on your angel’s day. People

unknown to you.” Here Nikolai Semyonovich, whom I so respect, upset me
very much: he made a very serious face and decided to send the girl to the
orphanage immediately. I felt very sad. They lived very economically, but
had no children, and Nikolai Semyonovich was always glad of it. I carefully
took Arinochka out of the basket and held her up by her little shoulders; the
basket gave off a sort of sour and sharp smell, as of a long-unwashed
nursing baby. After some arguing with Nikolai Semyonovich, I suddenly
announced to him that I was taking the girl at my own expense. He began to
object with a certain severity, despite all his mildness, and though he ended
with a joke, he left his intention about the orphanage in full force. It worked
out my way, however: on the same courtyard, but in another wing, lived a
very poor cabinetmaker, already an old man and a drunkard, but his wife, a
very healthy woman and not old at all, had just lost her nursing baby, and
above all her only one, who had been born after eight years of childless
marriage, also a girl, and by strange luck also named Arinochka. I say luck,
because as we were arguing in the kitchen, this woman, hearing about the
incident, came running to see, and when she learned that it was Arinochka,
her heart melted. Her milk was not gone yet; she opened her bodice and put
the baby to her breast. I fell before her and began begging her to take
Arinochka with her, and said I’d pay her monthly. She feared her husband
wouldn’t allow it, but took her for the night. In the morning, the husband
allowed it for eight roubles a month, and I counted them out to him for the
first month in advance. He drank up the money at once. Nikolai
Semyonovich, still smiling strangely, agreed to vouch for me to the
cabinetmaker that the money, eight roubles a month, would be paid
regularly. I tried to give Nikolai Semyonovich my sixty roubles in cash, by
way of security, but he wouldn’t take it; however, he knew I had the money
and trusted me. This delicacy on his part smoothed over our momentary
quarrel. Marya Ivanovna said nothing, but was surprised at my taking on
such a care. I especially appreciated their delicacy in that neither of them
allowed themselves the slightest mockery of me, but, on the contrary, began
to treat the matter with the proper seriousness. I ran by Darya Rodionovna’s
every day, three times a day or so, and a week later I gave her personally, in
her own hand, on the quiet from her husband, three more roubles. For
another three I bought swaddling clothes and a little blanket. But ten days
later, Rinochka suddenly got sick. I brought a doctor at once, he prescribed

something, and we spent the whole night fussing about and tormenting the
tiny thing with his nasty medicine, but the next day he declared that it was
too late, and to my entreaties—though they seemed more like reproaches—
he said with noble evasiveness, “I am not God.” The girl’s tongue, lips, and
whole mouth got covered with a sort of fine white rash, and towards
evening she died, gazing at me with her big dark eyes, as if she already
understood. I don’t understand how it didn’t occur to me to take a
photograph of her dead. Well, would you believe that I did not weep but
simply howled that evening, something I had never allowed myself to do,
and Marya Ivanovna was forced to comfort me—and again, totally without
mockery either on her own or on his part. The cabinetmaker made a little
coffin; Marya Ivanovna trimmed it with ruche and put a pretty little pillow
in it, and I bought flowers and strewed them over the little baby; and so
they took away my poor little wisp, whom, believe me, to this day I cannot
forget. A while later, though, this whole almost unexpected occurrence even
made me reflect a lot. Of course, Rinochka had not cost me much—thirty
roubles in all, including the coffin, the burial, the doctor, the flowers, and
the payments to Darya Rodionovna. I reimbursed myself for this money, as
I was leaving for Petersburg, from the forty roubles Versilov had sent me
for my trip, and by selling some things before I left, so that my whole
“capital” remained intact. “But,” I thought, “if I can be sidetracked like that,
I won’t get very far.” From the story with the student, it followed that the
“idea” can fascinate one to the point of a blurring of impressions and
distract one from the flow of actualities. From the story with Rinochka the
opposite followed, that no “idea” can be so intensely fascinating (for me, at
least) that I cannot stop suddenly before some overwhelming fact and
sacrifice to it at once all that I had done for the idea during years of toil.
Both conclusions were nonetheless correct.

Chapter Six
I
MY HOPES WERE not fully realized; I didn’t find them alone: though
Versilov wasn’t there, my mother was sitting with Tatyana Pavlovna—an
outsider after all. Half of my magnanimous mood fell off of me at once. It’s
astonishing how quick I am to turn about on such occasions; a hair or a
grain of sand is enough to disperse the good and replace it with the bad. But
my bad impressions, to my regret, are not so soon driven out, though I’m
not rancorous. As I entered, it flashed in me that my mother at once and
hastily broke off the thread of her conversation with Tatyana Pavlovna,
which seemed quite animated. My sister had returned from work just a
minute before me and had not come out of her little closet yet.
This apartment consisted of three rooms. The one in which everyone
usually sat, our middle room, or drawing room, was rather large and almost
decent. There were soft red sofas in it, though very shabby ones (Versilov
couldn’t stand slipcovers), rugs of some sort, several tables and needless
little tables. Then to the right was Versilov’s room, small and narrow, with
one window; in it stood a pathetic writing table, on which several unused
books and forgotten papers were scattered, and in front of the table, a no
less pathetic soft armchair, with a broken spring sticking out at an angle,
which often made Versilov groan and curse. His bed was made up in this
same study, on a soft and also shabby sofa; he hated this study of his and, it
seems, did nothing in it, but preferred to sit idly in the drawing room for
hours at a time. To the left of the drawing room was exactly the same sort of
room, in which my mother and sister slept. The entrance to the drawing
room was from the corridor, which ended with the entrance to the kitchen,
where lived the cook Lukerya, who, when she cooked, mercilessly filled the
whole apartment with the smoke of burnt oil. There were moments when
Versilov loudly cursed his life and his fate because of this kitchen smoke,
and in that alone I fully sympathized with him; I also hate such smells,

though they did not penetrate to me: I lived upstairs in a little room under
the roof, which I climbed to by an extremely steep and creaky little
staircase. Noteworthy in my place were the fan-window, the terribly low
ceiling, the oilcloth sofa, on which Lukerya spread a sheet and put a pillow
for me at night, while the rest of the furniture was just two objects—the
simplest plank table and a wicker chair with a hole in it.
However, our place still preserved the remains of a certain former
comfort; in the drawing room, for instance, there was a rather good china
lamp, and on the wall hung a fine, big engraving of the Dresden Madonna31
and just opposite on the other wall, an expensive photograph, of huge
dimensions, showing the cast bronze doors of the Florentine cathedral.32 In
a corner of the same room hung a big case with old family icons, one of
which (of All Saints) had a big gilt-silver casing, the same one they had
wanted to pawn, and another (of the Mother of God) a velvet casing
embroidered with pearls. Before the icons hung an icon lamp that was lit for
every feast. Versilov was obviously indifferent to the icons, in the sense of
their meaning, and merely winced sometimes, visibly restraining himself, at
the light of the icon lamp reflected in the gilt casing, complaining slightly
that it hurt his eyes, but all the same he did not keep my mother from
lighting it.
I usually entered silently and sullenly, looking somewhere into a corner,
and sometimes without any greeting. I always came home earlier than this
time, and had my dinner served upstairs. As I came in now, I suddenly said,
“Hello, mama,” something I had never done before, though somehow this
time, too, out of shyness, I still could not force myself to look at her, and sat
down at the opposite side of the room. I was very tired, but wasn’t thinking
of that.
“This ignoramus still comes into your house like a boor, just as he used
to,” Tatyana Pavlovna hissed at me; she had allowed herself abusive words
before as well, and it had become a custom between us.
“Hello . . .” my mother answered, as if immediately at a loss because I
had greeted her. “Dinner has been ready for a long time,” she added, almost

abashed, “if only the soup isn’t cold, and I’ll tell them right now about the
cutlets . . .” She hurriedly started getting up to go to the kitchen, and maybe
for the first time in the whole month, I suddenly felt ashamed that she
should jump up so promptly to serve me, though before that was just what I
myself had demanded.
“I humbly thank you, mama, I’ve already had dinner. If I’m not bothering
you, I’ll rest here.”
“Ah . . . well, then . . . stay, of course . . .”
“Don’t worry, mama, I’m not going to be rude to Andrei Petrovich
anymore,” I said abruptly . . .
“Ah, Lord, how magnanimous on his part!” cried Tatyana Pavlovna.
“Sonya, darling, can it be that you still address him formally? Who is he
that he should receive such honors, and that from his own mother! Look at
you getting all abashed in front of him, what a shame!”
“It would be very nice for me, mama, if you addressed me informally.”
“Ah . . . well, all right, then, I will,” my mother hastened to say. “I—I
didn’t always . . . well, from now on I’ll know.”
She blushed all over. Decidedly her face could be extremely attractive on
occasion . . . She had a simplehearted face, but not at all simpleminded,
slightly pale, anemic. Her cheeks were very gaunt, even hollow, and little
wrinkles were beginning to accumulate on her forehead, but there were
none around her eyes yet, and her eyes, rather big and wide open, always
shone with a gentle and quiet light, which had attracted me to her from the
very first day. I also liked it that there was nothing sad or pinched in her
face; on the contrary, its expression would even have been gay, if she hadn’t
been so frequently alarmed, sometimes for no reason, getting frightened and
jumping up sometimes over nothing at all, or listening fearfully to some
new conversation, until she was reassured that all was still well. With her,
“all was well” meant precisely that “all was as before.” If only nothing
changed, if only nothing new happened, even something fortunate! . . . One

might think she had somehow been frightened in childhood. Besides her
eyes, I liked the elongated shape of her face, and, I believe, if her
cheekbones had only been a little less wide, she might have been considered
a beauty, not only in her youth, but even now as well. Now she was no more
than thirty-nine years old, but her dark blond hair was already strongly
streaked with gray.
Tatyana Pavlovna looked at her with decided indignation.
“Before such a whelp? To tremble like that before him! You’re a funny
one, Sofya; you make me angry, that’s what!”
“Ah, Tatyana Pavlovna, why are you like this with him now! Or maybe
you’re joking, eh?” my mother added, noticing something like a smile on
Tatyana Pavlovna’s face. Indeed, Tatyana Pavlovna’s abuse was sometimes
impossible to take seriously, but she smiled (if she did smile), of course,
only at my mother, because she loved her kindness terribly and had
undoubtedly noticed how happy she was just then at my submissiveness.
“I, of course, can’t help feeling it, if you yourself fall upon people,
Tatyana Pavlovna, and precisely now, when I came in and said, ‘Hello,
mama,’ which is something I’ve never done before,” I finally found it
necessary to point out to her.
“Just imagine,” she boiled up at once, “he considers it a great deed?
Should we go down on our knees to you or something, because you’ve been
polite for once in your life? And as if that’s politeness! Why do you look off
into the corner when you come in? As if I don’t know how you storm and
rage at her! You might greet me as well, I swaddled you, I’m your
godmother.”
Naturally, I disdained to reply. Just then my sister came in, and I quickly
turned to her:
“Liza, I saw Vasin today, and he asked me about you. You’re
acquainted?”

“Yes, we met in Luga last year,” she answered quite simply, sitting down
next to me and looking at me affectionately. I don’t know why, but I
thought she’d just turn bright red when I told her about Vasin. My sister was
a blonde, a light blonde; her hair was quite unlike her mother’s and her
father’s, but her eyes and the shape of her face were almost like her
mother’s. Her nose was very straight, small, regular; however, there was
another peculiarity—small freckles on her face, something my mother
didn’t have at all. Of Versilov there was very little, perhaps only her slender
waist, her tall stature, and something lovely in her gait. And not the least
resemblance to me; two opposite poles.
“I knew himself for three months,” Liza added.
“You’re saying himself about Vasin, Liza? You ought to say him, and not
himself. Excuse me, sister, for correcting you, but it distresses me that your
education seems to have been quite neglected.”
“It’s mean on your part to make such observations in front of your
mother,” Tatyana Pavlovna flared up, “and you’re wrong, it hasn’t been
neglected.”
“I’m not saying anything about my mother,” I put in sharply. “You should
know, mama, that I look upon Liza as a second you; you’ve made of her the
same loveliness of kindness and character as you surely were yourself, and
are now, to this day, and will be eternally . . . What I meant was external
polish, all that society stupidity, which is nevertheless indispensable. I’m
only indignant that Versilov, if he heard you say himself instead of him
about Vasin, probably wouldn’t correct you at all—he’s so haughty and
indifferent with us. That’s what infuriates me!”
“He’s a bear cub himself, and here he’s teaching us about polish. Don’t
you dare, sir, to say ‘Versilov’ in front of your mother, or in my presence
either—I won’t stand for it!” Tatyana Pavlovna flashed fire.
“Mama, I received my salary today, fifty roubles, here, take it please!”
I went over and gave her the money; she became alarmed at once.

“Ah, I don’t know how I can take it!” she said, as if afraid to touch the
money. I didn’t understand.
“For pity’s sake, mama, if you both regard me as a son and a brother in
the family, then . . .”
“Ah, I’m guilty before you, Arkady; I should confess certain things to
you, but I’m so afraid of you . . .”
She said it with a timid and ingratiating smile; again I didn’t understand
and interrupted her:
“By the way, do you know, mama, that the case between Andrei
Petrovich and the Sokolskys was decided today in court?”
“Ah, I know!” she exclaimed, pressing her hands together fearfully in
front of her (her gesture).
“Today?” Tatyana Pavlovna gave a great start. “But it can’t be, he would
have told us. Did he tell you?” she turned to my mother.
“Ah, no, not that it was today, he didn’t tell me about that. I’ve been so
afraid all week. Even if he loses, I’d pray only so as to have it off our
shoulders and be as we were before.”
“So he didn’t tell you either, mama!” I exclaimed. “What a fellow!
There’s an example of his indifference and haughtiness; what did I just tell
you?”
“Decided how, how was it decided? And who told you?” Tatyana
Pavlovna flung herself about. “Speak!”
“But here’s the man himself! Maybe he’ll tell us,” I announced, hearing
his footsteps in the corridor, and quickly sat down near Liza.
“Brother, for God’s sake, spare mama, be patient with Andrei Petrovich .
. .” my sister whispered to me.

“I will, I will, I came back with that in mind.” I pressed her hand.
Liza looked at me very mistrustfully, and she was right.

II
HE CAME IN very pleased with himself, so pleased that he didn’t find it
necessary to conceal his state of mind. And in general he had become
accustomed, lately, to opening himself up before us without the least
ceremony, and not only to the bad in him, but even to the ridiculous,
something everyone is afraid of; yet he was fully aware that we would
understand everything to the last little jot. In the past year, by Tatyana
Pavlovna’s observation, he had gone very much to seed in his dress; his
clothes were always decent, but old and without refinement. It’s true that he
was prepared to wear the same linen for two days, which even made mother
upset; they considered it a sacrifice, and this whole group of devoted
women looked upon it as outright heroism. The hats he wore were always
soft, wide-brimmed, black; when he took his hat off in the doorway, the
whole shock of his very thick but much-graying hair just sprang up on his
head. I always liked looking at his hair when he took his hat off.
“Hello. Everybody’s gathered, even including him? I could hear his voice
in the front hall—denouncing me, it seems?”
One of the signs that he was in a merry mood was that he began
sharpening his wit on me. I didn’t reply, naturally. Lukerya came in with a
whole bag of purchases and put it on the table.
“Victory, Tatyana Pavlovna! The suit is won, and, of course, the princes
won’t decide to appeal. The case is mine! I at once found where to borrow a
thousand roubles. Sofya, put your work down, don’t strain your eyes. Just
home from work, Liza?”
“Yes, papa,” Liza replied with an affectionate look. She called him father;
I wouldn’t submit to that for anything.
“Tired?”

“Yes.”
“Leave work, don’t go tomorrow; and drop it completely.”
“It’s worse for me that way, papa.”
“I ask you to . . . I dislike it terribly when women work, Tatyana
Pavlovna.”
“How can they be without work? As if a woman shouldn’t work! . . .”
“I know, I know, that’s all splendid and right, and I agree beforehand; but
—I mean hand work mainly. Imagine, it seems to be one of my morbid, or,
better, one of my incorrect impressions from childhood. In the vague
memories from when I was five or six years old, I most often remember—
with disgust, of course—a conclave of clever women at a round table, stern
and severe, scissors, fabrics, patterns, and a fashion plate. They all divine
and opine, shaking their heads slowly and gravely, measuring and
calculating, as they prepare for the cutting out. All those affectionate faces,
which love me so much, suddenly become unapproachable. If I should start
acting up, I’d be taken away at once. Even my poor nanny, who holds me
with one hand and doesn’t respond to my crying and pulling, is
mesmerized, gazing and listening as if to a bird of paradise. It’s that
sternness of clever faces and gravity before the start of cutting out that I
find it painful to picture, for some reason, even now. You, Tatyana
Pavlovna, are terribly fond of cutting out! Aristocratic as it may be, I still
much prefer a woman who doesn’t work at all. Don’t take it to your own
account, Sofya . . . Not that you could! A woman is a great power even
without that. However, you know that, too, Sonya. What’s your opinion,
Arkady Makarovich? You probably protest?”
“No, not really,” I replied. “It’s particularly well put, that a woman is a
great power, though I don’t know why you connect it with work. And that
one can’t help working when one has no money—you know yourself.”
“But now it’s enough,” he turned to my mother, who was beaming all
over (when he addressed me, she gave a start), “at least for right now, I

don’t want to see any hand work, I ask for my own sake. You, Arkady, as a
youth of our time, are surely a bit of a socialist. Well, would you believe it,
my friend, those who have the greatest love of idleness are from the
eternally laboring people!”
“Maybe not idleness, but rest.”
“No, precisely idleness, total do-nothingness, that’s the ideal! I knew one
eternally laboring man, though not from the people; he was a rather
developed man and able to generalize. All his life, maybe every day, he
dreamed passionately and sweetly of the most total idleness, carrying his
ideal to the absolute—to the boundless independence, to the eternal
freedom of dreaming and idle contemplation. It went on like that till he
broke down completely at work. He couldn’t mend; he died in the hospital.
I’m sometimes seriously ready to conclude that the notion of the delights of
labor was thought up by idle people, of the virtuous sort, naturally. It’s one
of those ‘Geneva ideas’ from the end of the last century.33 Tatyana
Pavlovna, two days ago I cut out an advertisement from the newspaper.
Here it is.” He took a scrap of paper from his waistcoat pocket. “It’s from
one of those endless students, who know classical languages and
mathematics and are ready to relocate, live in a garret, or anywhere. Now
listen: ‘Female teacher prepares for all institutions of learning’ (for all,
listen to that) ‘and gives lessons in arithmetic’—just one line, but a classic!
Prepares for institutions of learning—of course, that also means in
arithmetic? No, she mentions arithmetic separately. This—this is pure
starvation, this is the ultimate degree of need. The touching thing here is
precisely this lack of skill: obviously she never prepared herself to be a
teacher, and is hardly able to teach anything. But it’s either drown herself,
or drag her last rouble to the newspaper and advertise that she prepares for
all institutions of learning and, on top of that, gives lessons in arithmetic.
Per tutto mondo e in altri siti.”20
“Ah, Andrei Petrovich, she must be helped! Where does she live?”
exclaimed Tatyana Pavlovna.

“Oh, there are lots of them!” He put the address in his pocket. “This bag
is full of all sorts of treats—for you, Liza, and for you, Tatyana Pavlovna;
Sofya and I don’t like sweets. You, too, if you please, young man. I bought
it all myself at Eliseevs’ and Ballet’s.34 For too long we’ve been ‘sitting
hungry,’ as Lukerya says.” (N.B. None of us ever sat hungry.) “There are
grapes, bonbons, duchesse pears, and a strawberry tart; I even bought some
excellent liqueur; also nuts. It’s curious, Tatyana Pavlovna, ever since
childhood I’ve loved nuts, you know, the simplest kinds. Liza takes after
me: she also likes to crack nuts like a squirrel. But there’s nothing lovelier,
Tatyana Pavlovna, than chancing sometimes, among your childhood
memories, to imagine yourself momentarily in the woods, in the bushes,
when you were gathering nuts . . . The days are almost autumnal, but clear,
sometimes so fresh, you hide in the thicket, you wander off into the forest,
there’s a smell of leaves . . . Do I see something sympathetic in your look,
Arkady Makarovich?”
“The first years of my childhood were also spent in the country.”
“Why, no, I believe you were living in Moscow . . . if I’m not mistaken.”
“He was living with the Andronikovs in Moscow when you came that
time; but before then he lived with your late aunt, Varvara Stepanovna, in
the country,” Tatyana Pavlovna picked up.
“Sofya, here’s the money, put it away. They promised to give me five
thousand one of these days.”
“So there’s no more hope for the princes?” asked Tatyana Pavlovna.
“None whatsoever, Tatyana Pavlovna.”
“I’ve always sympathized with you, Andrei Petrovich, and all of yours,
and have been a friend of your house; but, though the princes are strangers
to me, by God, I feel sorry for them. Don’t be angry, Andrei Petrovich.”
“I have no intention of sharing, Tatyana Pavlovna.”

“Of course, you know my thinking, Andrei Petrovich. They would have
stopped the litigation if you had offered to go halves with them at the very
beginning; now, of course, it’s too late. However, I won’t venture to judge .
. . I say it because the deceased certainly wouldn’t have cut them out of his
will.”
“Not only wouldn’t have cut them out, he’d certainly have left everything
to them and cut out just me alone, if he’d been able to do it and had known
how to write a will properly; but now the law is with me—and it’s finished.
I cannot and do not want to share, Tatyana Pavlovna, and the matter ends
there.”
He uttered this even with anger, which he rarely allowed himself. Tatyana
Pavlovna quieted down. Mother lowered her eyes somehow sadly: Versilov
knew that she approved of Tatyana Pavlovna’s opinion.
“It’s the slap in Ems!” I thought to myself. The document procured by
Kraft, which I had in my pocket, would fare badly if it fell into his hands. I
suddenly felt that it was all still hanging on my neck; this thought, in
connection with all the rest, of course, had an irritating effect on me.
“Arkady, I wish you’d dress better, my friend; you’re not dressed badly,
but in view of things to come, there’s a good Frenchman I might
recommend to you, a most conscientious man, and with taste.”
“I beg you never to make me such offers,” I suddenly ripped out.
“Why’s that?”
“I, of course, do not find it humiliating, but we are not in such agreement;
on the contrary, we even disagree, because one day, tomorrow, I’ll stop
going to the prince’s, seeing not the least work to do there . . .”
“But the fact that you go there, that you sit with him—is already work!”
“Such notions are humiliating.”

“I don’t understand; however, if you’re so ticklish, don’t take money
from him, just go there. You’ll upset him terribly; he’s already stuck on you,
you can be sure . . . However, as you wish . . .”
He was obviously displeased.
“You tell me not to ask for money, but thanks to you I did a mean thing
today. You didn’t warn me, and today I demanded my month’s salary from
him.”
“So you’ve already taken care of it; and, I’ll confess, I thought you’d
never begin to ask. How adroit you’ve all now become, though! There are
no young people these days, Tatyana Pavlovna.”
He was terribly irritated; I also became terribly angry.
“I ought to have settled accounts with you . . . it was you who made me
do it—now I don’t know how to be.”
“By the way, Sophie, give Arkady back his sixty roubles immediately;
and you, my friend, don’t be angry at the hasty reckoning. I can guess from
your face that you have some enterprise in mind, and that you’re in need of
. . . working capital . . . or something like that.”
“I don’t know what my face expresses, but I never expected of mama that
she would tell you about that money, since I asked her not to.” I looked at
my mother, flashing my eyes. I can’t even express how offended I was.
“Arkasha, darling, forgive me, for God’s sake, there was no way I
couldn’t tell him . . .”
“My friend, don’t hold it against her that she revealed your secrets,” he
turned to me. “Besides, she did it with good intentions—a mother simply
wanted to boast of her son’s feelings. But believe me, I’d have guessed that
you’re a capitalist even without that. All your secrets are written on your
honest face. He has ‘his idea,’ Tatyana Pavlovna, I told you so.”

“Let’s forget my honest face,” I went on ripping out. “I know you often
see through things, though in other cases no further than a chicken’s nose—
and your perceptive abilities have surprised me. Well, yes, I do have my
‘idea.’ The fact that you put it that way is, of course, accidental, but I’m not
afraid to admit it: I have an ‘idea.’ I’m not afraid and not ashamed.”
“Above all, don’t be ashamed.”
“But all the same I won’t ever reveal it to you.”
“That is, you won’t deign to reveal it. No need, my friend, I know the
essence of your idea even so; in any case, it’s this: ‘To the desert I withdraw
. . .’35 Tatyana Pavlovna! I think he wants . . . to become Rothschild, or
something like that, and withdraw into his grandeur. Naturally, he will
magnanimously grant you and me a pension—or maybe he won’t grant me
one—but in any case, that will be the last we see of him. He’s like a new
moon—it no sooner appears than it sets.”
I shuddered inside. Of course, it was all chance: he knew nothing and
wasn’t speaking of that at all, though he did mention Rothschild. But how
could he have defined my feelings so accurately: to break with them and
withdraw? He had guessed it all and wanted to dirty the tragedy of the fact
beforehand with his cynicism. There was no doubt that he was terribly
irritated.
“Mama, forgive me my outburst, the more so as it’s impossible to hide
anything from Andrei Petrovich anyway!” I laughed in-sincerely, trying to
move it all towards joking at least for a moment.
“The best thing, my dear, is that you laughed. It’s hard to imagine how
much every person gains by that, even in appearance. I’m speaking in the
most serious way. You know, Tatyana Pavlovna, he always looks as if he
has something so important on his mind that he’s even ashamed of this
circumstance himself.”
“I beg you seriously to be more restrained, Andrei Petrovich.”

“You’re right, my friend; but it needs to be spoken out once and for all,
so that we don’t keep touching on it later. You came to us from Moscow in
order to rebel at once—that’s what we know so far about the purpose of
your coming. Of the fact that you came in order to astonish us with
something—of that I naturally make no mention. Then, you’ve been with us
and snorting at us for a whole month—yet you’re obviously an intelligent
man and in that quality might have left such snorting to those who have no
other way of taking revenge on people for their nonentity. You always close
yourself up, whereas your honest air and red cheeks testify directly that you
could look everyone in the eyes with perfect innocence. He’s a
hypochondriac, Tatyana Pavlovna; I don’t understand, why are they all
hypochondriacs now?”
“If you didn’t even know where I grew up—how could you know what
makes a man a hypochondriac?”
“There’s the solution: you’re offended that I could forget where you grew
up!”
“Not at all! Don’t ascribe stupidities to me. Mama, Andrei Petrovich just
praised me for laughing, so let’s laugh—why sit like this! Shall I tell you
funny stories about myself? The more so as Andrei Petrovich knows
nothing of my adventures?”
It was all smoldering in me. I knew we’d never sit together again like
now, and that, having left this house, I would never come back, and
therefore, on the eve of all that, I couldn’t restrain myself. He himself had
challenged me to such a finish.
“That’s very nice, of course, if it really will be funny,” he observed,
peering at me keenly. “You turned a bit crude, my friend, wherever it was
that you grew up, but, anyhow, you’re still decent enough. He’s quite nice
today, Tatyana Pavlovna, and it’s an excellent thing that you’re finally
untying that bag.”
But Tatyana Pavlovna was frowning; she didn’t even turn at his words
and went on untying the bag and putting the treats on plates that had been

brought. Mother also sat in complete bewilderment, of course,
understanding and sensing that things were turning out wrong with us. My
sister again touched my elbow.

III
“I SIMPLY WANT to tell you all,” I began with the most casual air, “about
how a certain father met his own dear son for the first time; this took place
precisely ‘where he grew up’ . . .”
“But, my friend, won’t this be . . . boring? You know: tous les genres . .
.”2136
“Don’t frown, Andrei Petrovich, it’s not at all what you think. I precisely
want everyone to laugh.”
“Then may God hear you, my dear. I know you love us all and . . . you
won’t want to upset our evening,” he murmured somehow affectedly,
negligently.
“Here, too, of course, you’ve guessed by my face that I love you?”
“Yes, partly by your face.”
“Well, and I’ve long guessed by Tatyana Pavlovna’s face that she’s in
love with me. Don’t look at me so ferociously, Tatyana Pavlovna, it’s better
to laugh! Better to laugh!”
She suddenly turned quickly to me and peered at me piercingly for half a
minute.
“You watch out!” She shook her finger at me, but so seriously that it
could no longer refer to my stupid joke, but was a warning about something
else: “Does he intend to start something?”
“So, Andrei Petrovich, you really don’t remember how you and I met for
the first time in our lives?”

“By God, I’ve forgotten, my friend, and I apologize from the bottom of
my heart. I only remember that it was somehow very long ago and took
place somewhere . . .”
“Mama, do you remember visiting the village where I grew up, I think it
was before I was six or seven, and above all, did you really come to that
village once, or did I only imagine, as in a dream, that I saw you there for
the first time? I’ve long wanted to ask you, but I kept putting it off. Now the
time has come.”
“Why, yes, Arkashenka, yes! I visited Varvara Stepanovna there three
times; the first time I came when you were only one year old, the second
when you were already going on four, and then when you were just turning
six.”
“Well, there, I’ve been wanting to ask you about it all month.”
Mother simply glowed from the quick rush of memories, and she asked
me with feeling:
“Arkashenka, do you really remember me from then?”
“I don’t remember and don’t know anything, only something of your face
has remained in my heart all my life, and, besides that, the knowledge
remained that you were my mother. I see that village now as in a dream, I
even forget my nanny. I have a drop of recollection of Varvara Stepanovna,
only because she eternally had her cheek bound from toothache. I also
remember huge trees near the house, lindens, I think, then strong sunlight
sometimes coming through the open windows, a front garden with flowers,
a path, and you, mama, I remember clearly only at one moment, when you
took me to communion in the church there, and lifted me up to receive the
gifts and kiss the chalice; that was in summer, and a dove flew across under
the cupola, from window to window . . .”
“Lord! That’s just how it all was,” my mother clasped her hands, “and I
remember that little dove as if it were now. You gave a start just at the
chalice and cried, ‘A dove, a little dove!’”

“Your face, or something of it, its expression, remained so well in my
memory that five years later, in Moscow, I recognized you at once, though
no one told me then that you were my mother. And when I first met Andrei
Petrovich, I was taken from the Andronikovs; before that, I had quietly and
cheerfully vegetated with them for five years on end. I remember their
government apartment in detail, and all those ladies and girls, who have all
now aged so much here, and the house full of everything, and Andronikov
himself, how he himself brought all the provisions from town in bags—
fowl, perch, and suckling pig—and at table ladled out the soup for us, in
place of his wife, who was too uppish, and the whole table always laughed
at that, and he first of all. The young ladies there taught me French, but
most of all I loved Krylov’s fables,37 learned many of them by heart, and
recited one to Andronikov each day, going straight to his tiny study,
whether he was busy or not. Well, so it was through a fable that you and I
became acquainted, Andrei Petrovich . . . I see you’re beginning to
remember.”
“I remember a thing or two, my dear, namely, that you recited something
to me then . . . a fable, I believe, or a passage from Woe from Wit?38 What a
memory you have, though!”
“Memory! What else! I’ve remembered only this all my life.”
“Well, well, my dear, you even liven me up.”
He even smiled, and right after him my mother and sister began to smile.
Trustfulness was returning; but Tatyana Pavlovna, having arranged the
treats on the table and sat down in the corner, went on piercing me with her
nasty gaze.
“It so happened,” I went on, “that suddenly, one bright morning, a friend
of my childhood appeared, Tatyana Pavlovna, who always appeared
unexpectedly in my life, as in the theater, and took me in a carriage, and
brought me to a grand house, to a magnificent apartment. You were then
staying with Mme. Fanariotov, Andrei Petrovich, in her empty house, which
she had once bought from you; she was abroad at the time. I had always

worn short jackets; here suddenly I was dressed in a pretty blue frock coat
and excellent linen. Tatyana Pavlovna fussed over me all that day and
brought me many things; and I kept walking through the empty rooms,
looking at myself in all the mirrors. In this way, at around ten o’clock the
next morning, wandering about the apartment, I suddenly walked, quite by
chance, into your study. I’d already seen you the day before, when I was
brought there, but only fleetingly, on the stairs. You were coming down the
stairs to get into a carriage and go somewhere; you had arrived in Moscow
alone then, after an extremely long absence, and for a short time, so that
you were snapped up by everybody and almost didn’t live at home. Meeting
me and Tatyana Pavlovna, you only drew out a long ‘Ah!’—and didn’t even
stop.”
“He describes it with particular love,” observed Versilov, turning to
Tatyana Pavlovna; she turned away and didn’t answer.
“I can see you then as if it were now, flourishing and handsome. It’s
surprising how you’ve managed to age and lose your good looks in these
nine years—forgive my frankness; however, back then you were already
around thirty-seven, but I even gazed at you in wonder: you had such
astonishing hair, almost perfectly black, with a lustrous shine, and not a
trace of gray; moustache and side-whiskers of a jeweler’s finish—there’s no
other way to put it; your face was matte pale, not the sickly pale that it is
now, but like the face of your daughter Anna Andreevna, whom I had the
honor of meeting today; burning dark eyes and gleaming teeth, especially
when you laughed. You precisely burst out laughing as you looked me over
when I came in; I had little discernment then, only my heart rejoiced at your
smile. That morning you were in a dark blue velvet jacket, on your neck a
scarf of bright Solferino crimson over a magnificent shirt with Alençon
lace, standing in front of a mirror with a notebook in your hand and
rehearsing, declaiming Chatsky’s last monologue, and especially his last
cry:
‘My carriage, my carriage!’”

“Ah, my God,” cried Versilov, “but he’s right! Despite the shortness of
my stay in Moscow, I had undertaken then to play Chatsky in Alexandra
Petrovna Vitovtov’s home theater, because Zhileiko was sick!”39
“Had you really forgotten?” laughed Tatyana Pavlovna.
“He’s reminded me! And I confess, those few days in Moscow were
perhaps the best moment of my whole life! We were all still so young then .
. . and everyone was so ardently expectant . . . In Moscow then I
unexpectedly met so many . . . But go on, my dear, you did very well this
time to recall it in such detail . . .”
“I stood, looked at you, and suddenly cried, ‘Ah, how good, the real
Chatsky!’ You suddenly turned to me and asked, ‘So you already know
Chatsky?’—and sat down on the sofa and turned to your coffee in the most
charming mood—I could have kissed you. Then I told you that at
Andronikov’s everybody read a lot, and the young ladies knew many poems
by heart and played scenes from Woe from Wit among themselves, and that
last week we all read A Hunter’s Sketches40 aloud together, and that I loved
Krylov’s fables most of all and knew them by heart. You told me to recite
something by heart, and I recited ‘The Fussy Bride’ for you: ‘A maidenbride was thinking on a suitor.’”
“Precisely, precisely, now I remember everything,” Versilov cried again,
“but, my friend, I remember you clearly, too: you were such a nice boy
then, even a nimble boy, and, I swear to you, you’ve also lost a bit in these
nine years.”
Here everybody, even Tatyana Pavlovna herself, burst out laughing.
Clearly, Andrei Petrovich was joking and had “paid” me in my own coin for
my barb about his having aged. Everybody cheered up; and it had indeed
been well put.
“As I recited, you were smiling, but before I reached the middle, you
stopped me, rang the bell, and, when the servant came in, told him to send
for Tatyana Pavlovna, who came running with such a cheerful look that,

though I had seen her the day before, I almost didn’t recognize her now. In
front of Tatyana Pavlovna, I began ‘The Fussy Bride’ again and finished
brilliantly, even Tatyana Pavlovna smiled, and you, Andrei Petrovich, you
even shouted ‘Bravo!’ and observed warmly that if I had recited ‘The
Grasshopper and the Ant,’ it wouldn’t have been so surprising, that any
sensible boy my age could read it sensibly, but that this fable:
A maiden-bride was thinking on a suitor.
In that there’s yet no sin . . .
‘Just listen to how he articulates: “In that there’s yet no sin”!’ In short, you
were delighted. Here you suddenly began speaking to Tatyana Pavlovna in
French, and she instantly frowned and began to object to you, even very
vehemently; but since it was impossible to contradict Andrei Petrovich if he
suddenly wanted something, Tatyana Pavlovna hurried me off to her rooms;
there my face and hands were washed again, my shirt was changed, my hair
was pomaded and even curled. Then towards evening Tatyana Pavlovna
herself got dressed up quite magnificently, even more so than I could have
expected, and took me with her in a carriage. I found myself in a theater for
the first time in my life, at an amateur performance at Mme. Vitovtov’s:
candles, chandeliers, ladies, military men, generals, young ladies, a curtain,
rows of chairs—I had never seen anything like it before. Tatyana Pavlovna
took a most modest seat in one of the back rows and sat me down beside
her. Naturally, there were other children like me there, but I no longer
looked at anything and waited with a fainting heart for the performance.
When you came out, Andrei Petrovich, I was rapturous, rapturous to the
point of tears—why, over what, I don’t understand myself. Why tears of
rapture?—that’s what I’ve found so wild, remembering it all these nine
years! I followed the comedy with bated breath; of course, the only thing I
understood about it was that she was unfaithful to him, that stupid people
not worth his little finger laughed at him. When he declaimed at the ball, I
understood that he was humiliated and insulted, that he was reproaching all
these pathetic people, but that he was great, great! Of course, my
preparation at the Andronikovs’ contributed to my understanding, but—so
did your acting, Andrei Petrovich! I was seeing the stage for the first time!
In the final scene, when Chatsky cries, ‘My carriage, my carriage!’ (and

you cried it remarkably well), I tore from my seat and, together with the
whole audience, which burst into applause, I clapped and shouted ‘Bravo!’
with all my might! I vividly remember at that same moment a furious pinch
from Tatyana Pavlovna piercing me from behind, ‘below the lower back,’
but I paid no attention! Naturally, right after Woe from Wit, Tatyana
Pavlovna brought me home: ‘You can’t stay for the dancing, and it’s only
because of you that I can’t stay,’ you, Tatyana Pavlovna, hissed at me all the
way in the carriage. All night I was delirious, and the next day at ten
o’clock I was already standing by your study, but the study was closed. You
had people with you, you were busy with them; then you suddenly drove off
for the whole day, till late at night—and so I didn’t see you! What it was
that I wanted to tell you then—I’ve forgotten, of course, and didn’t know
then, but I had a burning desire to see you as soon as possible. But the next
morning, by eight o’clock, you were so good as to leave for Serpukhov: you
had just sold your Tula estate in order to pay off your creditors, but you
were still left holding a handsome sum, that was why you had come to
Moscow, which you couldn’t visit before then for fear of creditors; and
there was only this one boor from Serpukhov, alone of all your creditors,
who refused to take half the debt instead of the whole. Tatyana Pavlovna
wouldn’t even respond to my questions: ‘It’s nothing to you, and the day
after tomorrow I’ll be taking you to boarding school; get ready, gather your
notebooks, put your books in order, and get into the habit of packing your
own trunk, you’re not to grow up into a do-nothing, sir!’ and this and that—
oh, how you drummed away at me for those three days, Tatyana Pavlovna!
It ended with my being taken to Touchard’s boarding school, in love with
you and innocent, Andrei Petrovich, and it may have been the stupidest
incident, this whole encounter with you, but, would you believe it, six
months later I wanted to run away from Touchard’s to you!”
“You’ve told it beautifully and reminded me so vividly of everything, ”
Versilov pronounced distinctly, “but what chiefly strikes me in your account
is the wealth of certain strange details, about my debts, for instance. To say
nothing of a certain impropriety in these details, I don’t understand how you
could even have gotten hold of them.”

“Details? How I got hold of them? But, I repeat, the only thing I’ve done
is get hold of details about you all these nine years.”
“A strange confession and a strange pastime!”
He turned, half reclined in his armchair, and even yawned slightly—
whether on purpose or not, I don’t know.
“So, then, shall I go on with how I wanted to run away to you from
Touchard’s?”
“Forbid him, Andrei Petrovich, suppress him, and throw him out,”
Tatyana Pavlovna snapped.
“Impossible, Tatyana Pavlovna,” Versilov answered her imposingly.
“Arkady obviously has something in mind, and therefore we absolutely
must allow him to finish. Well, and let him! He’ll tell it and get it off his
chest, and for him the main thing is to get it off his chest. Begin your new
story, my dear—that is, I’m only calling it new; don’t worry, I know the
ending.”

IV
“I RAN AWAY, that is, I wanted to run away to you, very simply. Tatyana
Pavlovna, you remember how Touchard wrote you a letter two weeks after I
was installed there, don’t you? Marya Ivanovna showed me the letter later,
it also wound up among the late Andronikov’s papers. Touchard suddenly
thought he had asked too little money, and in his letter announced to you
‘with dignity’ that, in his institution, princes and senators’ children were
educated, and that he considered it beneath his institution to keep a pupil
with such an origin as mine, unless he was paid extra.”
“Mon cher, you might . . .”
“Oh, never mind, never mind,” I interrupted, “I’ll tell only a little about
Touchard. You replied to him from the provinces, Tatyana Pavlovna, two
weeks later, and sharply refused. I remember him then, all purple, coming

into our classroom. He was a very short and very stocky little Frenchman of
about forty-five, and indeed of Parisian origin, from cobblers, of course, but
from time immemorial he had held a government post in Moscow as a
teacher of French, and even had some rank, which he was extremely proud
of—a profoundly uneducated man. We, his pupils, were only six in number;
among us there was indeed some nephew of a Moscow senator, and we all
lived there in a completely family situation, more under the supervision of
his wife, a very affected lady, the daughter of some Russian official. During
those two weeks I put on airs terribly in front of my comrades, boasting of
my dark blue frock coat and my papa, Andrei Petrovich, and their questions
—why was I Dolgoruky and not Versilov—didn’t embarrass me in the least,
precisely because I didn’t know why myself.”
“Andrei Petrovich!” cried Tatyana Pavlovna in an almost threatening
voice. My mother, on the contrary, could not tear her eyes from me, and
obviously wanted me to continue.
“Ce Touchard . . . indeed, I recall him now, was small and fidgety,”
Versilov said through his teeth, “but he was recommended to me then from
the best side . . .”
“Ce Touchard came in holding the letter, went over to our big oak table,
at which all six of us were grinding away at something, seized me firmly by
the shoulder, raised me from my chair, and told me to pick up my
notebooks.
“‘Your place is not here, but there.’ He pointed to a tiny room to the left
of the front hall, in which stood a simple table, a wicker chair, and an
oilcloth sofa—exactly as I have now in my little room upstairs. I went there
with astonishment and greatly intimidated; never before had I been treated
rudely. Half an hour later, when Touchard left the classroom, I began
exchanging glances and laughter with my comrades; they, of course, were
laughing at me, but I didn’t guess that and thought we were laughing
because we were having fun. Here Touchard fell on me all at once, seized
me by the forelock, and started pulling.

“‘You dare not sit together with noble children, you’re of mean origin
and the same as a lackey!’
“And he hit me painfully on my plump red cheek. He liked that at once
and hit me a second and a third time. I wept and sobbed, I was terribly
astonished. For a whole hour I sat, covering my face with my hands, and
wept and wept. Something had taken place that I could in no way
understand. I don’t understand how someone like Touchard, a foreigner,
who was not a wicked man, who even rejoiced at the emancipation of the
Russian peasants, could beat such a stupid child as I. However, I was only
astonished, not insulted; I was still unable to be insulted. It seemed to me
that I had done some mischief, but when I improved, I’d be forgiven, and
we’d all suddenly become merry again, go and play in the yard, and have
the best possible life.”
“My friend, if I’d only known . . .” Versilov drawled with the careless
smile of a somewhat weary man. “What a scoundrel this Touchard was,
though! However, I still haven’t lost hope that you’ll somehow gather your
strength and finally forgive us for it all, and again we’ll have the best
possible life.”
He decidedly yawned.
“But I’m not accusing anybody, not at all, and, believe me, I’m not
complaining about Touchard!” I cried, somewhat thrown off. “And he beat
me only for two months or so. I remember I kept wanting to disarm him in
some way, rushed to kiss his hands, and kissed them and kept weeping and
weeping. My comrades laughed at me and despised me, because Touchard
started using me as a servant, ordered me to hold his clothes while he
dressed. Here my lackey character was instinctively of use to me. I tried as
hard as I could to cater to him, and wasn’t insulted in the least, because I
understood none of it yet, and I’m even astonished to this day that I was so
stupid then as not to understand how unequal I was to them all. True, my
comrades had already explained a lot to me—it was a good schooling.
Touchard ended by preferring to kick me from behind with his knee, rather
than slap my face; and six months later he even began to be gentle with me

at times; only now and then, but once a month for certain, he would give me
a beating, so that I wouldn’t forget myself. Soon I was also seated together
with the other children and allowed to play with them, but not once in two
and a half years did Touchard forget the difference in our social position,
and he still went on using me as a servant, though not too much—I think
precisely as a reminder to me.
“As for my running away, that is, my wanting to run away, that was five
months after those first two months. And generally all my life I’ve been
slow to make decisions. When I went to bed and covered myself with the
blanket, I at once began dreaming of you, Andrei Petrovich, of you alone; I
don’t know at all why it worked out that way. I even saw you in my sleep.
Above all, I dreamed passionately that you would suddenly walk in, and I’d
rush to you, and you would take me out of that place and bring me to your
house, to that study, and we’d go to the theater again, well, and so on.
Above all, we wouldn’t part—that was above all! And when I had to wake
up in the morning, then suddenly the boys’ mockery and scorn would begin.
One of them would begin straight off by beating me and making me bring
him his boots; he would abuse me in the nastiest terms, especially trying to
explain my origin to me, to the delight of all the listeners. And when
Touchard himself suddenly appeared, something unbearable started in my
soul. I felt that I’d never be forgiven here—oh, I was gradually beginning to
understand precisely what would not be forgiven and precisely where my
fault lay! And so I finally resolved to run away. I dreamed of it terribly for a
whole two months, and finally decided; it was September then. I waited till
all my comrades went away for the weekend, and meanwhile, on the sly, I
carefully tied myself up a little bundle of the most necessary things. I had
two roubles. I was going to wait till it got dark. ‘I’ll creep down the stairs,’ I
thought, ‘and go out, and then go on.’ Where? I knew that Andronikov had
already been transferred to Petersburg, so I decided to find Mme.
Fanariotov’s house on the Arbat. ‘I’ll spend the night walking or sitting
somewhere, and in the morning I’ll ask somebody in the courtyard: where is
Andrei Petrovich now, and if not in Moscow, then in what city or country?
They’ll surely tell me, I’ll leave, and then in another place somewhere I’ll
ask somebody which gate to take in order to go to such and such city, and
so I’ll go out, and go on, go on. I’ll keep on going; I’ll spend the nights

somewhere under the bushes, and I’ll eat nothing but bread, and for two
roubles I’ll have enough bread for a very long time.’ On Saturday, however,
I didn’t manage to run away; I had to wait for the next day, Sunday, and, as
if on purpose, Touchard and his wife went somewhere on Sunday; Agafya
and I were the only ones left in the whole house. I waited for night in
terrible anguish, I remember, sitting in our classroom by the window and
looking at the dusty street with its little wooden houses and the rare
passersby. Touchard lived on the outskirts, and the city gate could be seen
from the windows: is that the one? I kept imagining. The setting sun was so
red, the sky was so cold, and a sharp wind, just like today, blew the sand
about. It finally became completely dark. I stood in front of an icon and
began to pray, only quickly, quickly, I was in a hurry; I seized my little
bundle and tiptoed down the creaky stairs, terribly afraid that Agafya would
hear me from the kitchen. The door was locked, I opened it, and suddenly—
dark, dark night stood black before me like an endless and dangerous
unknown, and the wind tore at my visored cap. I went out; from across the
pavement came the hoarse, drunken bellowing of an abusive passerby; I
stood, looked, and quietly turned back, quietly went upstairs, quietly
undressed, put down my bundle, and lay facedown, without tears and
without thoughts, and it was from that very moment, Andrei Petrovich, that
I began to think! From that very moment, when I realized that, besides
being a lackey, I was also a coward, my real and correct development
began!”
“And at this very moment I see through you once and for all!” Tatyana
Pavlovna suddenly jumped up from her place, and even so unexpectedly
that I was quite unprepared for it. “Not only were you a lackey then, you’re
a lackey now, you have a lackey soul! What would it have cost Andrei
Petrovich to send you to be a cobbler? He’d even have done a good deed,
teaching you a craft! Who would ask or demand that he do any more for
you? Your father, Makar Ivanych, did not so much ask as almost demand
that you, his children, not be taken from the lower estates. No, you don’t
appreciate that he got you as far as the university, and that through him you
acquired rights.41 The boys teased him, you see, and so he swore to take
revenge on mankind . . . Scum that you are!”

I confess, I was astounded by this outburst. I stood up and stared for
some time, not knowing what to say.
“Why, Tatyana Pavlovna has indeed told me something new,” I finally
turned firmly to Versilov. “I’m indeed so much of a lackey that I can in no
way be satisfied merely with the fact that Versilov did not send me to be a
cobbler; even ‘rights’ didn’t appease me, but give me, say, the whole of
Versilov, give me my father . . . that’s what I was demanding—am I not a
lackey? Mama, it has been on my conscience for eight years, how you came
alone to Touchard’s to visit me, and how I received you then, but there’s no
time for that now, Tatyana Pavlovna won’t let me tell it. Till tomorrow,
mama, maybe you and I can still see each other. Tatyana Pavlovna! Well,
what if I’m once again a lackey to such a degree that I cannot even allow a
man whose wife is still living to marry yet another wife? And that’s nearly
what happened with Andrei Petrovich in Ems! Mama, if you don’t want to
stay with a husband who might marry another woman tomorrow, remember
that you have a son, who promises to be a respectful son forever—
remember, and let’s go, only with the understanding that it’s ‘either him or
me.’ Do you want to? I’m not asking for an answer now; I know it’s
impossible to answer such questions straight off . . .”
But I couldn’t finish, first of all, because I became excited and confused.
My mother turned all pale and her voice seemed to fail her: she couldn’t
utter a word. Tatyana Pavlovna was saying a lot and very loudly, so that I
couldn’t even make it out, and twice she shoved me on the shoulder with
her fist. I only remember her shouting that my words were “affected,
fostered in a petty soul, dug out with a finger.” Versilov sat motionless and
very serious, not smiling. I went to my room upstairs. The last look to
accompany me out of the room was my sister’s look of reproach; she
sternly shook her head behind me.

Chapter Seven
I
I’M DESCRIBING ALL these scenes without sparing myself, in order to
recall it all clearly and restore the impression. Going upstairs to my room, I
had absolutely no idea whether I should be ashamed of myself or
triumphant, like someone who has done his duty. If I had been a bit more
experienced, I would have guessed that the least doubt in such a matter
should be interpreted for the worse. But I was thrown off by another
circumstance: I don’t understand what I was glad about, but I was terribly
glad, in spite of my doubts and the clear awareness that I had flunked it
downstairs. Even the fact that Tatyana Pavlovna had abused me so
spitefully struck me as only ridiculous and amusing, but didn’t anger me at
all. Probably that was all because I had broken the chain anyway and for the
first time felt myself free.
I also felt that I had harmed my situation: still greater darkness
surrounded the question of how I should now act with the letter about the
inheritance. They would now decidedly take it as a wish to be revenged on
Versilov. But while still downstairs, during all those debates, I had resolved
to submit the matter of the letter about the inheritance to arbitration, and to
appeal to Vasin as arbiter, and, failing Vasin, to yet another person, I already
knew whom. Once, this time only, I’ll go to Vasin, I thought to myself, and
then—disappear from them all for a long time, for several months, and I’ll
even especially disappear from Vasin; only maybe I’ll see my mother and
sister every once in a while. All this was disorderly; I felt I had done
something, though not in the right way, and—and I was pleased; I repeat,
all the same I was glad of something.
I had decided to go to bed early, foreseeing a lot of running around the
next day. Besides renting an apartment and moving, I took a few other
decisions which I resolved to carry out in one way or another. But the

evening was not to end without its curiosity, and Versilov did manage to
astonish me greatly. He had decidedly never come up to my little room, and
suddenly, I hadn’t been there an hour when I heard his footsteps on the little
stairs: he called me to light his way. I brought a candle and, reaching out my
hand, which he seized, helped him to drag himself up.
“Merci, friend, I never once crept up here, not even when I was renting
the apartment. I sensed it was something like this, but all the same I never
supposed it was quite such a kennel,” he stood in the middle of my room,
looking around with curiosity. “Why, it’s a coffin, a perfect coffin!”
Indeed, it had a certain resemblance to the inside of a coffin, and I even
marveled at how correctly he had defined it with a single word. It was a
long and narrow closet; at the height of my shoulder, not more, the angle
between the wall and the roof began, the top of which I could touch with
my palm. For the first minute, Versilov instinctively stooped, for fear of
bumping his head on the ceiling, though he didn’t and ended by sitting
down quite calmly on my sofa, where my bed was already made up. As for
me, I did not sit down and looked at him in deep astonishment.
“Your mother tells me she didn’t know if she should take the money you
offered her today for your monthly upkeep. In view of this coffin, not only
should the money not be taken, but, on the contrary, a deduction should be
made from us in your favor! I’ve never been here and . . . can’t imagine that
it’s possible to live here.”
“I’m used to it. But what I can’t get used to is seeing you here after all
that went on downstairs.”
“Oh, yes, you were considerably rude downstairs, but . . . I also have my
particular goals, which I’ll explain to you, though, anyhow, there’s nothing
extraordinary in my visit. Even what took place downstairs is also perfectly
in the order of things. But explain this to me, for Christ’s sake: what you
told us there, downstairs, and which you prepared for us and set about so
solemnly—can that be all you intended to reveal or tell? Was there nothing
else?”

“That was all. That is, let’s say it was all.”
“A bit lacking, my friend; I confess, judging by the way you set about it,
and how you invited us to laugh—in short, seeing how anxious you were to
tell it, I expected more.”
“But isn’t it all the same to you?”
“I’m concerned, essentially, with the sense of measure: it wasn’t worth
such noise, and so the measure was upset. For a whole month you were
silent, making ready, and suddenly—nothing!”
“I wanted to go on longer, but I’m ashamed that I told even that much.
Not everything can be told in words, certain things it’s better never to tell. I
did tell enough, though, but you didn’t understand me.”
“Ah! so you, too, suffer sometimes because a thought won’t go into
words! It’s a noble suffering, my friend, and granted only to the chosen; a
fool is always pleased with what he says, and, besides, he always says more
than he needs to; they like extras.”
“As I did downstairs, for instance. I also said more than I needed to; I
demanded ‘the whole of Versilov,’ which is much more than I need. I don’t
need any Versilov at all.”
“My friend, I see you want to make up for what you lost downstairs.
You’re obviously repentant, and since with us to repent means immediately
to fall upon someone again, you don’t want to miss the mark with me a
second time. I came early, you haven’t cooled off yet, and, besides, you
have difficulty putting up with criticism. But sit down, for God’s sake, I’ve
come to tell you something; that’s right, thank you. From what you said to
your mother downstairs, on your way out, it’s only too clear that it will be
better, even in any case, if we live separately. I’ve come in order to
persuade you to do it as softly as possible and without a scandal, so as not
to upset or frighten your mother still more. Even the fact that I’ve come
here myself has already cheered her up; she somehow believes that we’ll
still manage to be reconciled, well, and everything will go as before. I think

if you and I laughed loudly now once or twice, we’d fill their timid hearts
with delight. They may be simple hearts, but they are sincerely and artlessly
loving, why shouldn’t we pamper them on occasion? Well, that’s one thing.
Second: why should we necessarily part still with a thirst for vengeance,
with a grinding of teeth, with curses, and so on? Without any doubt, it won’t
do at all for us to go hanging on each other’s necks, but we can part, so to
speak, with mutual respect, isn’t that true, eh?”
“That’s all nonsense! I promise I’ll move out without a scandal—and
enough. Are you going to this trouble because of my mother? Yet to me it
seems that my mother’s peace makes decidedly no difference to you, and
you’re only saying it.”
“You don’t believe me?”
“You speak to me decidedly as to a child!”
“My friend, I’m ready to ask your forgiveness for it a thousand times,
and for all you’ve laid to my account, for all those years of your childhood
and so on, but, cher enfant, what will come of it? You’re intelligent enough
not to want to wind up in such a stupid position. I say nothing of the fact
that even up to this moment I quite fail to understand the character of your
reproaches: indeed, what is it, essentially, that you blame me for? That you
weren’t born a Versilov? Or what? Bah! you laugh scornfully and wave
your arms—does that mean no?”
“Believe me, no. Believe me, I find no honor in being named Versilov.”
“Let’s leave honor out of it; besides, your answer was bound to be
democratic. But if so, what do you blame me for?”
“Tatyana Pavlovna just said everything I needed to know and never could
understand before: that you didn’t send me to be a cobbler, consequently I
should be grateful. I fail to understand why I’m not grateful even now,
when I’ve been brought to reason. Or is it your proud blood speaking,
Andrei Petrovich?”

“Probably not. And, besides, you must agree that all your outbursts
downstairs, instead of falling on me, as you meant, only tyrannized and
tormented her. Yet it seems it’s not for you to judge her. And how is she
guilty before you? Explain to me also, by the way, my friend: why was it
and with what purpose that you spread it around in school, and in high
school, and all your life, and in front of every first comer, as I’ve heard, that
you are illegitimate? I’ve heard that you did it with a sort of special
eagerness. And yet it’s all nonsense and vile slander: you are legitimate, a
Dolgoruky, the son of Makar Ivanych Dolgoruky, a respectable man,
remarkable for his intelligence and character. And if you have received
higher education, that is in fact owing to your former master, Versilov, but
what of it? Above all, by proclaiming your illegitimacy, which in itself is a
slander, you thereby revealed your mother’s secret and, out of some sort of
false pride, dragged your mother to judgment before the first scum to come
along. My friend, that is very ignoble, the more so as your mother is not
personally guilty of anything: hers is the purest character, and if she is not
Mrs. Versilov, it is solely because she is still married.”
“Enough, I agree with you completely, and I believe so much in your
intelligence that I fully hope you will stop this already too-lengthy scolding
of me. You have such a love of measure; and yet everything has its
measure, even your sudden love of my mother. This will be better: since
you’ve ventured to come to me and sit here for a quarter or half an hour (I
still don’t know what for; well, let’s suppose it’s for my mother’s peace of
mind)—and, moreover, you talk to me with such eagerness, in spite of what
happened downstairs, it would be better if you told me about my father—
this Makar Ivanovich, the wanderer.42 I’d like to hear about him precisely
from you; I’ve long meant to ask you. Since we’re parting, and maybe for a
long time, I’d also like very much to get an answer from you to this
question: how is it possible that in this whole twenty years you could have
no effect on my mother’s prejudices, and now also my sister’s, enough to
dispel with your civilizing influence the surrounding darkness of her
original milieu? Oh, I’m not talking about her purity! Even without that she
has always been infinitely superior to you morally, forgive me, but . . . this
is merely an infinitely superior corpse. Only Versilov lives, and all the rest
around him, and everything connected with him, vegetates under the

unfailing condition that it has the honor of nourishing him with its forces,
its living juices. But wasn’t she alive once? Wasn’t there something you
loved in her? Wasn’t she a woman once?”
“My friend, if you like, she never was,” he answered me, twisting at once
into that former manner he had had with me, which I remembered so well,
and which infuriated me so much; that is, he was apparently the most
sincere simpleheartedness, but look—and everything in him was just the
deepest mockery, so that sometimes I couldn’t figure out his face at all, “she
never was! A Russian woman can never be a woman.”
“And a Polish woman, a French woman, can be? Or an Italian, a
passionate Italian woman, there’s what’s capable of captivating a civilized
Russian man of a higher milieu like Versilov?”
“Well, who would have expected to run into a Slavophile?”43 Versilov
laughed.
I remember his story word for word; he even began talking with great
eagerness and obvious pleasure. It was all too clear to me that he had by no
means come to me for a chat, and not at all so as to calm my mother, but
probably with other goals in mind.

II
“ALL THESE TWENTY years, your mother and I have lived in complete
silence,” he began his palaver (affected and unnatural in the highest
degree), “and all that has been between us has taken place in silence. The
main quality of our twenty-year-long liaison has been—speechlessness. I
don’t think we even quarreled once. True, I often went away and left her
alone, but in the end I always came back. Nous revenons toujours,22 that’s a
fundamental quality of men; it’s owing to their magnanimity. If the matter
of marriage depended on women alone, no marriage would stay together.
Humility, meekness, lowliness, and at the same time firmness, strength, real
strength—that is your mother’s character. Note that she’s the best of all the
women I’ve met in the world. And that there is strength in her—that I can

testify to; I’ve seen how that strength nourishes her. Where it’s a matter, I
wouldn’t say of convictions, there can be no proper convictions here, but of
what they consider convictions, which, to their minds, also means sacred,
there even torture would be to no avail. Well, but you can judge for
yourself: do I look like a torturer? That’s why I preferred to be silent about
almost everything, not only because it’s easier, and, I confess, I don’t regret
it. In this way everything went over by itself, broadly and humanely, so that
I don’t even ascribe to myself any praise for it. I’ll say, by the way, in
parenthesis, that for some reason I suspect she never believed in my
humaneness, and therefore always trembled; but while trembling, at the
same time she never yielded to any culture. They somehow know how to do
it, and there’s something here that we don’t understand, and generally they
know better than we how to manage their own affairs. They can go on
living in their own way in situations that are most unnatural for them, and
remain completely themselves in situations that are most not their own. We
can’t do that.”
“They who? I don’t quite understand you.”
“The people, my friend, I’m speaking of the people. They have
demonstrated this great, vital force and historical breadth both morally and
politically. But to return to what we were saying, I’ll observe about your
mother that she’s not always silent; your mother occasionally says things,
but says them in such a way that you see straight off that you’ve only
wasted your time talking, even if you’ve spent five years beforehand
gradually preparing her. Besides, her objections are quite unexpected. Note
once again that I don’t consider her a fool at all; on the contrary, there’s a
certain kind of intelligence here, and even a most remarkable intelligence;
however, maybe you won’t believe me about her intelligence . . .”
“Why not? I only don’t believe that you really believe in her intelligence
yourself, and are not pretending.”
“Oh? You consider me such a chameleon? My friend, I allow you a bit
too much . . . as a spoiled son . . . but let it remain so for this time.”

“Tell me about my father—the truth, if you can.”
“Concerning Makar Ivanovich? Makar Ivanovich is, as you already
know, a household serf, who had, so to speak, a desire for a certain glory . .
.”
“I’ll bet that at this moment you envy him for something!”
“On the contrary, my friend, on the contrary, and, if you wish, I’m very
glad to see you in such whimsical spirits; I swear that precisely now I am in
a highly repentant humor, and precisely now, at this moment, and maybe for
the thousandth time, I impotently regret all that happened twenty years ago.
Besides, as God is my witness, it all happened quite inadvertently . . . well,
and afterwards, as far as it was in my power, also humanely; at least so far
as I then understood the endeavor of humaneness. Oh, we were all boiling
over then with the zeal to do good, to serve civic goals, high ideas; we
condemned ranks, our inherited rights, estates, and even moneylenders, at
least some of us did . . . I swear to you. We weren’t many, but we spoke
well and, I assure you, we sometimes even acted well.”
“That was when you wept on his shoulder?”
“My friend, I agree with you in everything beforehand; by the way, you
heard about the shoulder from me, which means that at this moment you are
making wicked use of my own simpleheartedness and trustfulness; but you
must agree that that shoulder really wasn’t as bad as it seems at first sight,
especially for that time; we were only beginning then. I was faking, of
course, but I didn’t know I was faking. Don’t you ever fake, for instance, in
practical cases?”
“Just now, downstairs, I waxed a little sentimental, and felt very
ashamed, as I was coming up here, at the thought that you might think I was
faking. It’s true that on some occasions, though your feelings are sincere,
you sometimes pretend; but downstairs just now it was all natural.”
“That’s precisely it; you’ve defined it very happily in a single phrase:
‘though your feelings are sincere, all the same you pretend.’ Well, that’s

exactly how it was with me: though I was pretending, I wept quite sincerely.
I won’t dispute that Makar Ivanovich might have taken that shoulder as an
added mockery, if he had been more clever; but his honesty then stood in
the way of his perspicacity. Only I don’t know whether he pitied me then or
not; I remember I very much wanted that.”
“You know,” I interrupted him, “you’re mocking now, too, as you say
that. And generally all the time, whenever you spoke to me during this
whole month, you did it mockingly. Why did you always do that when you
spoke to me?”
“You think so?” he replied meekly. “You’re very suspicious. However, if
I do laugh, it’s not at you, or at least not at you alone, rest assured. But I’m
not laughing now, and back then—in short, I did all I could then, and,
believe me, not for my own benefit. We, that is, the beautiful people, as
opposed to the common folk, did not know at all how to act for our own
benefit then; on the contrary, we always mucked things up for ourselves as
much as possible, and I confess, among us then we considered that some
sort of ‘higher benefit of our own’—in a higher sense, naturally. The
present generation of advanced people is much more grasping than we
were. At that time, even before the sin, I explained everything to Makar
Ivanovich with extraordinary directness. I now agree that much of it didn’t
need to be explained at all, still less with such directness; to say nothing of
humaneness, it would simply have been more polite. But try restraining
yourself when you’re dancing away, and want to perform a nice little step!
And maybe such are the demands of the beautiful and the lofty44 in reality,
all my life I’ve been unable to resolve that. However, it’s too profound a
theme for our superficial conversation, but I swear to you that I sometimes
die of shame when I remember it. I offered him three thousand roubles then,
and, I remember, he said nothing, I alone did the talking. Imagine, I fancied
he was afraid of me, that is, of my serf-owning rights, and, I remember, I
tried as hard as I could to encourage him; I persuaded him not to be afraid
of anything and to voice all his wishes, and even with all possible criticism.
As a guarantee, I gave him my word that if he didn’t accept my conditions,
that is, the three thousand, freedom (for him and his wife, naturally), and
that he should go off on a journey any which way (without his wife,

naturally)—he should tell me so directly, and I would at once grant him his
freedom, let him have his wife, reward them both with the same three
thousand, I believe, and it would not be they who would go off any which
way, but I myself would go away to Italy for three years, all alone. Mon
ami, I wouldn’t have taken Mlle. Sapozhkov to Italy, I assure you; I was
extremely pure at that time. And what then? This Makar understood
excellently well that I would do just what I said; but he went on saying
nothing, and only when I was about to fall down before him a third time, he
drew back, waved his arm, and went out even somewhat unceremoniously, I
assure you, which even surprised me then. I saw myself for a moment in the
mirror then, and cannot forget it. In general, when they don’t say anything,
it’s worst of all, and he was a gloomy character, and, I confess, not only did
I not trust him, when I summoned him to my study, but I was even terribly
afraid: there are characters in that milieu, and terribly many of them, who
contain in themselves, so to speak, the incarnation of unrespectability, and
that is something one fears more than a beating. Sic. And what a risk, what
a risk I took! What if he had shouted for the whole yard to hear, howled,
this provincial Uriah45—well, how would it have been then for me, an
undersized David, and what could I have done? That was why I resorted to
the three thousand first, it was instinctive, but, fortunately, I was mistaken;
this Makar Ivanovich was something quite different . . .”
“Tell me, was there a sin? You said you sent for the husband even before
the sin?”
“That depends, you see, on how you understand . . .”
“Meaning there was. You just said you were mistaken about him, that he
was something different. What was different?”
“Precisely what, I don’t know even now. But it was something else, and,
you know, even quite respectable; I conclude that because by the end I felt
three times more ashamed in his presence. The very next day he agreed to
go on a journey, without a word—naturally, not forgetting any of the
rewards I had offered.”

“He took the money?”
“What else! You know, my friend, on this point he even quite surprised
me. Naturally, I didn’t happen to have three thousand in my pocket at the
time, but I got hold of seven hundred roubles and handed them to him to
start with. And what then? He requested the remaining two thousand three
hundred from me, just to be sure, in the form of a promissory note in the
name of some merchant. Two years later he used this letter to request the
money from me through the court, and with interest, so that he surprised me
again, the more so as he literally went about collecting money for building a
church of God, and since then he’s been wandering for twenty years. I don’t
understand why a wanderer needs so much money for himself . . . money’s
such a worldly thing . . . At that moment, of course, I offered it sincerely
and, so to speak, with an initial fervor, but later, when so much time had
passed, I naturally might have thought better of it . . . and I hoped he would
at least spare me . . . or, so to speak, spare us, her and me, would at least
wait. However, he didn’t even wait . . .”
(I’ll make a necessary nota bene here: if my mother should happen to
outlive Mr. Versilov, she would be left literally without a kopeck in her old
age, if it weren’t for that three thousand of Makar Ivanovich’s, which had
long been doubled by interest, and which he left to her in its entirety, to a
rouble, last year in his will. He had divined Versilov even then.)
“You once said that Makar Ivanovich came to visit you several times, and
always stayed in my mother’s apartment?”
“Yes, my friend, and I confess, at first I was terribly afraid of those visits.
In all this period, in twenty years, he came only six or seven times, and on
the first occasions, if I was at home, I hid myself. I didn’t even understand
at first what it meant and why he came. But then, owing to certain
considerations, it seemed to me that it was not at all that stupid on his part.
Then, by chance, I decided out of curiosity to go and look at him, and, I
assure you, my impression was most original. This was his third or fourth
visit, precisely at the time when I was about to become an arbiter of the
peace and when, naturally, I was setting out with all my strength to study

Russia. I even heard a great many new things from him. Besides, I met in
him precisely what I had never expected to meet: a sort of good humor, an
evenness of character, and, most surprisingly, all but mirth. Not the slightest
allusion to that (tu comprends23), and, in the highest degree, an ability to
talk sense and to talk excellently well, that is, without that stupid
homegrown profundity, which, I confess, I cannot stand, despite all my
democratism, and without all those strained Russicisms in which ‘real
Russian people’ speak in novels or on stage. With all that, extremely little
about religion, unless you brought it up yourself, and even quite nice stories
of their own sort about monasteries and monastery life, if you yourself
became curious. And above all—deference, that modest deference,
precisely the deference that is necessary for the highest equality, moreover,
without which, in my opinion, one cannot attain to superiority. Precisely
here, through the lack of the least arrogance, one attains to the highest
respectability, and there appears a person who undoubtedly respects
himself, and precisely whatever the situation he finds himself in, and
whatever his destiny happens to be. This ability to respect oneself in one’s
own situation—is extremely rare in the world, at least as rare as a true sense
of one’s own dignity . . . You’ll see for yourself, once you’ve lived. But
what struck me most afterwards, precisely afterwards, and not at the
beginning” (Versilov added), “was that this Makar was of extremely stately
appearance and, I assure you, was extremely handsome. True, he was old,
but Dark-faced, tall, and straight,46
simple and grave; I even marveled at how my poor Sofya could have
preferred me then; he was fifty then, but was still such a fine fellow, and I
was such a whirligig beside him. However, I remember he was already
unpardonably gray then, which meant he was just as gray when he married
her . . . That might have had an influence.”
This Versilov had the most scoundrelly high-toned manner: having said
(when it was impossible not to) several quite clever and beautiful things,
suddenly to end on purpose with some stupidity like this surmise about
Makar Ivanovich’s gray hair and its influence on my mother. He did it on
purpose, probably not knowing why himself, from a stupid society habit. To

listen to him—it seemed he was speaking very seriously, and yet within
himself he was faking or laughing.

III
I DON’T UNDERSTAND why I was suddenly overcome then by terrible
anger. Generally, I recall some of my outbursts in those minutes with great
displeasure. I suddenly got up from my chair.
“You know what,” I said, “you say you came mainly so that my mother
would think we’ve made peace. Enough time has passed for her to think
that; would you kindly leave me alone?”
He blushed slightly and got up from his place.
“My dear, you are extremely unceremonious with me. However, goodbye; love can’t be forced. I’ll allow myself only one question: do you really
want to leave the prince?”
“Aha! I just knew you had special goals . . .”
“That is, you suspect I came to persuade you to stay with the prince,
because I stand to profit from it myself. But, my friend, you don’t think I
also invited you from Moscow with some sort of profit in mind, do you?
Oh, how suspicious you are! On the contrary, I wished for your own good
in everything. And even now, when my means have improved so much, I
wish that, at least occasionally, you would allow your mother and me to
help you.”
“I don’t like you, Versilov.”
“And it’s even ‘Versilov.’ By the way, I regret very much that I couldn’t
pass this name on to you, for in fact my whole fault consists only in that, if
it is a fault, isn’t that so? But, once again, I couldn’t marry a married
woman, judge for yourself.”
“That’s probably why you wanted to marry an unmarried one?”

A slight spasm passed over his face.
“You mean Ems. Listen, Arkady, you allowed yourself that outburst
downstairs, pointing the finger at me in front of your mother. Know, then,
that precisely here you went widest of the mark. You know exactly nothing
of the story of the late Lydia Akhmakov. Nor do you know how much your
mother herself participated, yes, even though she wasn’t there with me; and
if I ever saw a good woman, it was then, as I looked at your mother. But
enough, this is all still a mystery, and you—you say who knows what and in
somebody else’s voice.”
“The prince said precisely today that you were an amateur of unfledged
girls.”
“The prince said that?”
“Yes. Listen, do you want me to tell you exactly why you came to me
now? I’ve been sitting all this while asking myself what was the secret of
this visit, and now, it seems, I’ve finally guessed it.”
He was already on his way out, but he stopped and turned his head to me
in expectation.
“Earlier I let slip in passing that Touchard’s letter to Tatyana Pavlovna
got in with Andronikov’s papers and wound up, after his death, with Marya
Ivanovna in Moscow. I saw something suddenly twitch in your face, and
only now did I guess why, when something just twitched in your face again
in exactly the same way: it occurred to you then, downstairs, that if one of
Andronikov’s letters had already wound up with Marya Ivanovna, why
shouldn’t another do the same? And Andronikov might have left some
highly important letters, eh? Isn’t that so?”
“And I came to you wanting to make you blab about something?”
“You know it yourself.”
He turned very pale.

“You didn’t figure that out on your own; there’s a woman’s influence
here. And how much hatred there is in your words—in your coarse guess!”
“A woman’s? And I saw that woman just today! Maybe you want to have
me stay with the prince precisely in order to spy on her?”
“Anyhow, I see you’ll go extremely far on your new road. Mightn’t this
be ‘your idea’? Go on, my friend, you have unquestionable ability along the
sleuthing line. Given talent, one must perfect it.”
He paused to catch his breath.
“Beware, Versilov, don’t make me your enemy!”
“My friend, in such cases no one speaks his last thoughts, but keeps them
to himself. And now give me some light, I beg you. You may be my enemy,
but not so much, probably, as to wish me to break my neck. Tiens, mon
ami,24 imagine,” he continued, going down, “all this month I’ve been taking
you for a good soul. You want so much to live and thirst so much to live,
that it seems if you were given three lives, it wouldn’t be enough for you;
it’s written on your face. Well, and such men are most often good souls.
And see how mistaken I’ve been!”

IV
I CAN’T EXPRESS how my heart was wrung when I was left alone: as if I
had cut off a piece of my own living flesh! Why I had suddenly gotten so
angry, and why I had offended him like that—so intensely and deliberately
—I couldn’t tell now, of course, or then either. And how pale he had turned!
And what, then? Maybe that paleness was an expression of the most sincere
and pure feelings and the deepest grief, and not of anger and offense. It
always seemed to me that there were moments when he loved me very
much. Why, why should I not believe that now, the more so as so much has
now been completely explained?
But maybe indeed I grew angry all at once and drove him out because of
the sudden guess that he had come to me hoping to find out whether any

more of Andronikov’s letters had been left to Marya Ivanovna? That he
must have been looking for those letters and was looking for them—that I
knew. But who knows, maybe then, precisely at that moment, I was terribly
mistaken! And who knows, maybe it was I, by that very mistake, who
prompted him afterwards in the thought of Marya Ivanovna and the
possibility of her having letters?
And, finally, again a strange thing: again he had repeated word for word
my own thought (about three lives), which I had told to Kraft earlier that
day and, above all, in my own words. The coincidence of words was once
again chance, but all the same how well he knows the essence of my
character: what insight, what perception! But if he understands one thing so
well, why doesn’t he understand another at all? And can it be that he wasn’t
faking, but was indeed unable to guess that what I needed was not
Versilovian nobility, that it was not my birth that I couldn’t forgive him, but
that all my life I’ve needed Versilov himself, the whole man, the father, and
that this thought has already entered my blood? Can it be that such a subtle
man can be so dull and crude? And if not, then why does he enrage me,
why does he pretend?

Chapter Eight
I
THE NEXT MORNING I tried to get up as early as possible. Ordinarily we
got up at around eight o’clock, that is, my mother, my sister, and I; Versilov
indulged himself till half-past nine. Precisely at half-past eight my mother
would bring me coffee. But this time, not waiting for coffee, I slipped out of
the house at exactly eight o’clock. The evening before, I had made up a
general plan of action for this whole day. In this plan, despite my passionate
resolve to set about fulfilling it at once, I sensed that there was a great deal
that was unstable and uncertain at the most important points; that was why
almost all night I had been as if in half-sleep, delirious, had an awful lot of
dreams, and hardly a moment of proper sleep. Nevertheless I got up brisker
and fresher than ever. I especially did not want to meet my mother. I
couldn’t talk to her otherwise than on a certain subject, and I was afraid to
distract myself from the goals I had set myself by some new and
unexpected impression.
The morning was cold, and a damp, milky fog lay upon everything. I
don’t know why, but I always like the busy early morning in Petersburg,
despite its extremely nasty look, and all these egoistic and ever-pensive
folk, hurrying about their business around eight in the morning, have some
special attraction for me. I especially like, as I hurry on my way, either to
ask somebody something businesslike, or to have somebody ask me
something: both question and answer are always brief, clear, sensible, given
without stopping, and are almost always friendly, and the readiness to
respond is greatest at that hour. The Petersburger becomes less
communicative in the middle of the day or towards evening, and is ready to
abuse or deride at the least opportunity; it’s quite different in the early
morning, before work, at the most sober and serious time. I’ve noticed that.

I was again heading for the Petersburg side. Since I absolutely had to be
back on the Fontanka by twelve to see Vasin (who could most often be
found at home at twelve), I hurried and didn’t stop, in spite of a great urge
to have coffee somewhere. Besides, I also had absolutely to catch Efim
Zverev at home; I was going to him again and in fact almost came too late;
he was finishing his coffee and getting ready to go out.
“What brings you so often?” he met me without getting up from his
place.
“I’m about to explain that.”
Any early morning, a Petersburg one included, has a sobering effect on
man’s nature. Some flaming night’s dream even evaporates completely with
the coming of morning’s light and cold, and I myself have happened of a
morning to recall some of my night’s only just-passed reveries, and
sometimes also acts, with reproach and shame. However, I’ll observe in
passing that I consider the Petersburg morning, seemingly the most prosaic
on the whole earth, to be all but the most fantastic in the world. That is my
personal view, or, better to say, impression, but I’ll stand up for it. On such
a Petersburg morning, foul, damp, and foggy, the wild dream of some
Pushkinian Hermann from the “Queen of Spades” (a colossal character, an
extraordinary, perfectly Petersburgian type—a type from the Petersburg
period!)47—it seems to me, should grow still stronger. A hundred times, in
the midst of this fog, a strange but importunate reverie has come to me:
“And if this fog breaks up and lifts, won’t this whole foul, slimy city go
with it, rise up with the fog and vanish like smoke, and leave only the
former Finnish swamp, and in the middle, perhaps, for the beauty of it, a
bronze horseman on a hot-breathed, overridden steed?”48 In short, I can’t
convey my impressions, because it’s all finally fantasy, poetry, and
therefore rubbish. Nevetheless, one totally meaningless question has often
come to me and comes to me now: “Here they all are rushing and throwing
themselves about, and who knows, maybe it’s all somebody’s dream, and
there’s not a single true, genuine person here, not a single real act? The
somebody whose dream it is will suddenly wake up—and everything will
suddenly vanish.” But I’m getting carried away.

I’ll say beforehand: there are projects and dreams in every life so
seemingly eccentric that at first sight they might unmistakably be taken for
madness. It was with one of these fantasies that I went that morning to
Zverev—to Zverev, because I had no one else in Petersburg to whom I
could turn this time. And yet Efim was precisely the last person to whom, if
I had had a choice, I would have turned with such a suggestion. When I sat
down facing him, it even seemed to me myself that I, the incarnation of
fever and delirium, was sitting down facing the incarnation of the golden
mean and prose. But on my side was an idea and a right feeling, while on
his there was only the practical conclusion that it’s never done that way. In
short, I explained to him, briefly and clearly, that apart from him I had
absolutely no one in Petersburg whom I could send, in view of an urgent
matter of honor, to act as a second; that he was an old comrade and
therefore did not even have the right to refuse, and that I wanted to
challenge the lieutenant of the guards, Prince Sokolsky, on the grounds that,
a little more than a year ago, in Ems, he had given my father, Versilov, a
slap in the face. I’ll note, at the same time, that Efim knew even in great
detail all my family circumstances, my relations with Versilov, and almost
all that I myself knew of Versilov’s history; I had told it to him myself at
various times, except, of course, for certain secrets. He sat and listened, as
he usually did, ruffled up like a sparrow in a cage, silent and serious, puffyfaced, with his disheveled flaxen hair. A motionless, mocking smile never
left his lips. This smile was the nastier in that it was involuntary and not at
all deliberate; it was evident that he really and truly considered himself at
that moment vastly superior to me in intelligence and character. I also
suspected that, besides that, he also despised me for yesterday’s scene at
Dergachev’s; that was as it should have been: Efim was the crowd, Efim
was the street, and that always bows down only to success.
“And Versilov doesn’t know of it?” he asked.
“Of course not.”
“Then what right do you have to interfere in his affairs? That’s the first
thing. And, second, what do you want to prove by it?”

I knew the objections and at once explained to him that it was not at all
as stupid as he supposed. First, it would be proved to the insolent prince
that there were still people of our estate who understood honor, and, second,
Versilov would be shamed and learn a lesson. And, third, and most
important, even if Versilov, owing to certain convictions of his own, was
right not to have challenged the prince and to have decided to bear with the
slap, he would at least see that there was a being who was able to feel his
offense so strongly that he took it as his own, and was ready even to lay
down his life for his interests . . . in spite of the fact that he had parted with
him forever . . .
“Wait, don’t shout, my aunt doesn’t like it. Tell me, is it the same Prince
Sokolsky that Versilov is in litigation with over an inheritance? In that case,
it will be a totally new and original way of winning in court—by killing
your opponents in a duel.”
I explained to him en toutes lettres25 that he was simply stupid and
insolent, and that if his mocking smile spread wider and wider, that only
proved his smugness and ordinariness, that he couldn’t really suppose that
the thought of the litigation had not been in my head right from the very
start, but had deigned to visit only his much-thinking head. Then I told him
that the litigation had already been won, and besides, that it had been
conducted not against Prince Sokolsky, but against the Princes Sokolsky, so
that if one prince was killed, the others would remain, but that the challenge
would undoubtedly have to be put off till after the period of appeal (though
the princes would not appeal), solely for the sake of decency. Once the
period was over, the duel would follow; but I had come now because the
duel would not be at once, but I had to secure a second, because I didn’t
have one, I didn’t know anybody, so as to find one at least by the time I
needed him, if he, Efim, refused. That’s why I came, I said.
“Well, come back and talk then, there’s no point rolling ten miles for
nothing.”
He got up and took his cap.

“And you’ll go then?”
“Naturally not.”
“Why?”
“I won’t go for this reason alone, that if I agree now to go then, you’ll
spend the whole period of appeal dragging yourself to me every day. And
the main thing is that it’s all nonsense, and that’s that. Why should I ruin my
career because of you? The prince would up and ask me, ‘Who sent you?’
‘Dolgoruky.’ ‘And what has Dolgoruky got to do with Versilov?’ So then I
should explain your genealogy to him? He’ll just laugh!”
“Then give him one in the mug!”
“Well, that’s all fairy tales.”
“Afraid? You’re so tall; you were the strongest one in high school.”
“Afraid, of course I’m afraid. The prince won’t fight, because they only
fight with equals.”
“I’m also a gentleman by development, I have the right, I’m equal . . . on
the contrary, it’s he who’s unequal.”
“No, you’re little.”
“Why little?”
“You’re just little; we’re both little, but he’s big.”
“You’re a fool! By law I could have gotten married a year ago.”
“So go and get married, and even so you’re a pipsqueak; you’re still
growing!”
I realized, of course, that he had decided to jeer at me. Undoubtedly this
whole stupid anecdote could have gone untold, and it would be even better

if it died unknown; besides, it’s disgusting in its pettiness and uselessness,
though it had quite serious consequences.
But to punish myself still more, I’ll tell it in full. Having perceived that
Efim was jeering at me, I allowed myself to give him a shove on the
shoulder with my right hand, or, better to say, with my right fist. He then
took me by the shoulders, turned me face to the field, and—really proved to
me that he was indeed the strongest one in our high school.

II
THE READER, OF COURSE, will think that I was in a terrible mood
going out of Efim’s, and yet he will be mistaken. I realized only too well
that it was childish, a schoolboy incident, but the seriousness of the matter
remained intact. I had my coffee only on Vassilievsky Island, purposely
skipping my yesterday’s tavern on the Petersburg side; both the tavern and
the nightingale had become doubly hateful to me. A strange quality: I’m
capable of hating places and objects as if they were people. On the other
hand, there are also several happy places in Petersburg, that is, places
where, for some reason, I was happy—and I cherish those places and
purposely don’t visit them for as long as possible, so that later, when I’m
quite alone and unhappy, I can go there to grieve and recall. Over coffee I
did full justice to Efim and his common sense. Yes, he was more practical
than I, but hardly more realistic. Realism that is limited to the end of one’s
nose is more dangerous than the most insane fantasticality, because it’s
blind. But in doing justice to Efim (who at that moment probably thought I
was going down the street cursing him), I still did not yield anything of my
convictions, as I haven’t up till now. I’ve seen people who, at the first
bucket of cold water, renounce not only their actions, but even their idea,
and begin to laugh at something they considered sacred only an hour before.
Oh, how easily it’s done with them! Grant that Efim, even in the essence of
the matter, was more right than I, and I was stupider than all that’s stupid
and merely clowning, but still, in the very depth of the matter, there lay a
point, standing upon which I, too, was right, there was something correct on
my side, too, and, above all, something that they could never understand.

I wound up at Vasin’s, on the Fontanka by the Semyonovsky Bridge,
almost exactly at twelve o’clock, but I didn’t find him at home. He had his
work on Vassilievsky, and came home strictly at certain hours, among
others almost always before twelve. Since, besides that, it was some
holiday, I had supposed I would be sure to find him; not finding him, I
settled down to wait, despite the fact that I had come to see him for the first
time.
I reasoned like this: the matter of the letter about the inheritance was a
matter of conscience, and I, in choosing Vasin as a judge, was thereby
showing him the whole depth of my respect, which, of course, should be
flattering to him. Naturally, I was truly concerned about this letter and
really convinced of the necessity for arbitration; but I suspect, nevertheless,
that even then I could have wriggled out of the difficulty without any
outside help. And, above all, I knew it myself; to wit: I had only to hand the
letter over to Versilov personally, and he could do whatever he wanted; that
was the solution. And to make myself the supreme judge and arbiter in a
matter like this was even quite wrong. In removing myself by handing the
letter over, and that precisely silently, I would profit at once by that very
thing, putting myself in a higher position than Versilov, for by renouncing
all profit from the inheritance, so far as it concerned me (because, being
Versilov’s son, I would, of course, have something coming to me, if not
now, then later), I would forever preserve for myself a superior moral view
of Versilov’s future action. And, again, no one could reproach me for
ruining the princes, because the document had no decisive legal
significance. All this I thought over and figured out completely, while
sitting in Vasin’s empty room, and it even entered my head that I had come
to see Vasin so desirous of his advice about what to do, with the sole
purpose of letting him see what a highly noble and umercenary man I was,
and thus taking revenge on him for my humiliation before him yesterday.
Having realized all that, I felt great vexation; nevertheless, I did not leave
but stayed, though I knew for certain that my vexation would only grow
greater every five minutes.

First of all, I began to take a terrible dislike to Vasin’s room. “Show me
your room, and I’ll know your character”—you really can say that. Vasin
lived in a furnished room, renting from tenants, obviously poor ones, who
earned their living that way and had other lodgers. I was acquainted with
these narrow little rooms, hardly filled with furniture, and yet with
pretensions to a comfortable look; here was the inevitable soft sofa from the
flea market, which it was dangerous to move, the washstand, and the iron
bed behind a screen. Vasin was obviously the best and most reliable tenant.
A landlady is sure to have one such best tenant, who receives special favors
for it: his room is cleaned and swept more thoroughly, some lithograph gets
hung over the sofa, a consumptive little rug gets spread under the table.
People who like this musty cleanness and, above all, the landlady’s
obsequious deference—are themselves suspect. I was convinced that the
title of best tenant flattered Vasin. I don’t know why, but the sight of those
two tables piled high with books gradually began to infuriate me. Books,
papers, an inkstand—everything was in the most disgusting order, the ideal
of which coincides with the worldview of a German landlady and her maid.
There were quite a few books—not magazines or newspapers, but real
books—and he obviously read them, and probably sat down to read or
began to write with an extremely grave and precise look. I don’t know, but I
like it better when books are scattered about in disorder, when studies are at
least not turned into a sacred rite. Probably this Vasin is extremely polite
with visitors, but probably his every gesture tells the visitor, “I’ll now sit
with you for an hour and a half or so, and then, when you leave, I’ll get
down to business.” Probably you can start up an extremely interesting
conversation with him and hear something new, but—“I’m now going to
have a talk with you, and I’ll get you very interested, but when you leave
I’ll get down to what’s most interesting . . .” And, nevertheless, I still didn’t
leave, but sat there. By then I was thoroughly convinced that I had no need
at all of his advice.
I had already been sitting for an hour and more, and was sitting by the
window on one of the two wicker chairs that stood by the window. It also
infuriated me that time was passing and I still had to find quarters before
evening. I wanted to pick up some book out of boredom, but I didn’t; the
very thought of amusing myself made it doubly disgusting. The

extraordinary silence had gone on for more than an hour, and then suddenly,
somewhere very close by, behind the door screened by the sofa, I began to
make out, involuntarily and gradually, a whispering that grew louder and
louder. Two voices were speaking, obviously women’s by the sound of
them, though it was quite impossible to make out their words; and
nevertheless, out of boredom, I somehow began to listen. It was clear that
they were speaking animatedly and passionately, and that the talk was not
about patterns: they were arranging or arguing about something, or one
voice persuaded and begged while the other disobeyed and objected. Must
have been some other tenants. I soon got bored and my ear grew
accustomed to it, so that, though I went on listening, I did so mechanically,
sometimes even quite forgetting that I was listening, when suddenly
something extraordinary happened, just as if someone had jumped from a
chair with both feet or had suddenly jumped up from his place and stamped;
then came a groan and a sudden cry, not even a cry, but a shriek, animal,
angry, that no longer cared whether other people heard it or not. I rushed to
the door and opened it; at the same time another door opened at the end of
the corridor, the landlady’s as I learned afterwards, from which two curious
heads peeked out. The cry, however, subsided at once; then suddenly the
door next to mine, the women neighbors’, opened, and a young woman, as
it seemed to me, quickly burst out of it and ran down the stairs. The other
woman, an elderly one, wanted to hold her back, but couldn’t, and only
moaned behind her:
“Olya, Olya, where are you going? Oh!”
But, seeing our two open doors, she quickly closed hers, leaving a crack
and listening through it to the stairs, till the sound of Olya’s running
footsteps died away completely. I went back to my window. Everything was
quiet. A trifling incident, and maybe also ridiculous. I stopped thinking
about it.
Around a quarter of an hour later, a loud and brash male voice rang out in
the corridor, just by Vasin’s door. Somebody grasped the door handle and
opened it enough so that I could make out some tall man in the corridor,
who obviously also saw me and was even already studying me, though he

did not yet come into the room, but, still holding the door handle, went on
talking with the landlady all the way down the corridor. The landlady called
out to him in a thin and gay little voice, and one could tell by her voice that
she had long known the visitor, and respected and valued him as both a
solid guest and a merry gentleman. The merry gentleman shouted and
cracked jokes, but the point was only that Vasin was not at home, that he
never could find him at home, that it had been so ordained, and that he
would wait again, as the other time, and all this undoubtedly seemed the
height of wittiness to the landlady. Finally the visitor came in, thrusting the
door fully open.
This was a well-dressed gentleman, obviously from one of the best
tailors, in “high-class fashion,” as they say, and yet he had very little of the
high-class about him, and that, it seemed, despite a considerable desire to
have it. He was not really brash, but somehow naturally insolent, which was
in any case less offensive than insolence that rehearsed itself in front of a
mirror. His hair, dark blond gone slightly gray, his black eyebrows, big
beard, and big eyes, not only did not personalize his character, but seemed
precisely to endow it with something general, like everyone else. Such a
man laughs, and is ready to laugh, yet for some reason you never feel merry
with him. He passes quickly from a laughing to a grave look, from a grave
to a playful or winking one, but it is all somehow scattered and pointless . . .
However, there’s no sense describing it beforehand. Later I came to know
this gentleman much better and more closely, and therefore I have
involuntarily presented him now more knowingly than then, when he
opened the door and came into the room. Though now, too, I would have
difficulty saying anything exact or definite about him, because the main
thing in these people is precisely their unfinishedness, scatteredness, and
indefiniteness.
He had not yet had time to sit down, when I suddenly fancied that this
must be Vasin’s stepfather, a certain Mr. Stebelkov, of whom I had already
heard something, but so fleetingly that I could not have said precisely what:
I only remembered that it was not something nice. I knew that Vasin had
lived for a long time as an orphan under his authority, but that he had long
since gotten out from under his influence, that their goals and their interests

were different, and that they lived separately in all respects. I also
remembered that this Stebelkov had some capital, and that he was even
some sort of speculator and trafficker; in short, it may be that I already
knew something more specific about him, but I forget. He sized me up at a
glance, though without any greeting, placed his top hat on the table in front
of the sofa, pushed the table aside peremptorily with his foot, and did not so
much sit as sprawl directly on the sofa, on which I had not ventured to sit,
so that it let out a creak, dangled his legs, and, lifting up the right toe of his
patent leather boot, began to admire it. Of course, he turned to me at once
and again sized me up with his big, somewhat immobile eyes.
“I never find him at home!” he nodded his head to me slightly.
I said nothing.
“Unpunctual! His own view of things. From the Petersburg side?”
“You mean that you have come from the Petersburg side?” I returned the
question.
“No, I’m asking you.”
“I . . . I came from the Petersburg side, but how did you find out?”
“How? Hm.” He winked, but did not deign to explain.
“That is, I don’t live on the Petersburg side, but I was on the Petersburg
side just now and then came here.”
He went on silently smiling some sort of significant smile, which I
disliked terribly. There was something stupid in this winking.
“At Mr. Dergachev’s?” he said finally.
“What, at Dergachev’s?” I opened my eyes wide.
He looked at me victoriously.

“I don’t even know him.”
“Hm.”
“As you wish,” I replied. I was beginning to find him repulsive.
“Hm, yes, sir. No, sir, pardon me; you buy something in a shop, in
another shop next to it another buyer buys something else, and what do you
think it is? Money, sir, from a merchant who is known as a moneylender,
sir, because money’s also a thing, and the moneylender is also a merchant . .
. Do you follow?”
“Perhaps so.”
“A third buyer walks past and, pointing at one of the shops, says, ‘That’s
substantial,’ then, pointing at another of the shops, says, ‘That’s
insubstantial.’ What conclusion can I draw about this buyer?”
“How should I know?”
“No, sir, pardon me. I’ll give an example; man lives by good example. I
go down Nevsky Prospect and notice that on the other side of the street,
walking down the sidewalk, is a gentleman whose character I should like to
determine. We reach, on different sides, the same turn onto Morskaya
Street, and precisely there, where the English shop is, we notice a third
pedestrian who has just been run over by a horse. Now get this: a fourth
gentleman passes by and wishes to determine the character of the three of
us, including the run-over one, in the sense of practicality and substantiality
. . . Do you follow?”
“Excuse me, but with great difficulty.”
“Very well, sir; just as I thought. I’ll change the subject. I’ve been more
than once to the spas in Germany, mineral water spas, it makes no
difference which. I walk on the waters and see Englishmen. As you know,
it’s hard to strike up an acquaintance with an Englishman; but then, after
two months, having finished the cure, we’re all in a mountainous region, a

whole company, with alpenstocks, going up a mountain, this one or that, it
makes no difference. At a turn, that is, at a stopping-place, precisely where
the monks make Chartreuse liqueur—note that—I met a native, standing
solitarily, gazing silently. I wish to conclude about his substantiality: what
do you think, could I turn for a conclusion to the crowd of Englishmen,
with whom I was proceeding solely because I was unable to strike up a
conversation with them at the spa?”
“How should I know? Excuse me, but I find it very hard to follow you.”
“Hard?”
“Yes, you tire me.”
“Hm.” He winked and made some sort of gesture with his hand, probably
meant to signify something very triumphant and victorious; then, quite
solidly and calmly, he drew from his pocket a newspaper, obviously just
bought, opened it, and began reading the last page, apparently leaving me
completely alone. For some five minutes he didn’t look at me.
“The Brest-Graevs49 didn’t go bust, eh? They took off, they keep going! I
know many that went bust straightaway.”
He looked at me from the bottom of his heart.
“I understand little about the stock exchange as yet,” I replied.
“Denial?”
“Of what?”
“Money, sir.”
“I don’t deny money, but . . . but, it seems to me, first comes the idea, and
then money.”

“That is, pardon me, sir . . . here stands a man, so to speak, before his
own capital . . .”
“First a lofty idea, and then money, but without a lofty idea along with
money, society will collapse.”
I don’t know why I began to get heated. He looked at me somewhat
dully, as if confused, but suddenly his whole face extended into the merriest
and slyest smile:
“That Versilov, eh? He snapped it up, snapped it right up! It was decided
yesterday, eh?”
I suddenly and unexpectedly perceived that he had long known who I
was, and maybe knew much more as well. Only I don’t understand why I
suddenly blushed and stared most stupidly, without taking my eyes off him.
He was visibly triumphant, he looked at me merrily, as if he had found me
out and caught me at something in the slyest manner.
“No, sir,” he raised both eyebrows, “you’re now going to ask me about
Mr. Versilov! What did I just tell you about substantiality? A year and a half
ago, on account of that baby, he could have brought off a perfect little deal
—yes, sir, but he went bust, yes, sir.”
“On account of what baby?”
“On account of a nursing baby that he’s now nurturing on the side, only
he won’t get anything through that . . . because . . .”
“What nursing baby? What is this?”
“His baby, of course, his very own, sir, by Mademoiselle Lydia
Akhmakov . . . ‘A lovely maiden did caress me . . .’50 Those phosphorus
matches—eh?”
“What nonsense, what wildness! He never had a baby by Miss
Akhmakov!”

“Go on! And where have I been then? I’m both a doctor and a male
midwife. Name’s Stebelkov, haven’t you heard? True, I had long ceased to
practice by then, but I could give practical advice in a practical matter.”
“You’re a male midwife . . . you delivered Miss Akhmakov’s baby?”
“No, sir, I didn’t deliver Miss Akhmakov’s anything. In that suburb there
was a Doctor Granz, burdened with a family, they paid him half a thaler,
that’s the situation there with doctors, and on top of that nobody knew him,
so he was there in my place . . . It was I who recommended him, for the
darkness of the unknown. Do you follow? And I only gave one piece of
practical advice, to a question from Versilov, sir, Andrei Petrovich, to a
most highly secret question, sir, eye to eye. But Andrei Petrovich preferred
two birds.”
I was listening in profound amazement.
“You can’t kill two birds with one stone, says a folk, or, more correctly, a
simple-folk’s proverb. But I say exceptions that constantly repeat
themselves turn into a general rule. He tried to hit a second bird, that is,
translating it into Russian, to chase after another lady—and got no results.
Once you grab something, hold on to it. Where things need speeding up, he
hems and haws. Versilov is a ‘women’s prophet,’ sir—that’s how young
Prince Sokolsky beautifully designated him to me then. No, you should
come to me! If you want to learn a lot about Versilov, come to me.”
He obviously admired my mouth gaping in astonishment. Never had I
heard a thing up till then about a nursing baby. And it was at that moment
that the neighbors’ door suddenly banged and somebody quickly went into
their room.
“Versilov lives in the Semyonovsky quarter, on Mozhaiskaya Street, at
Mrs. Litvinov’s house, number seventeen, I went to the address bureau
myself !” an irritated female voice cried loudly. We could hear every word.
Stebelkov shot up his eyebrows and raised a finger over his head.

“We talk about him here, and there he’s already . . . There’s those
exceptions that constantly repeat themselves! Quand on parle d’une corde26
. . .”
With a quick jump, he sat up on the sofa and began listening at the door
where the sofa stood.
I was also terribly struck. I realized that this woman shouting was
probably the same one who had run out earlier in such agitation. But how
did Versilov figure in it? Suddenly someone shrieked again as earlier, the
furious shriek of a person turned savage with wrath, who is not being given
something or is being held back from something. The only difference from
the previous time was that the cries and shrieks went on longer. A struggle
could be heard, some words, rapid, quick: “I don’t want to, I don’t want to,
give it back to me, give it back to me right now!” or something like that—I
can’t quite remember. Then, as the other time, someone rushed swiftly to
the door and opened it. Both women ran out to the corridor, one of them, as
earlier, obviously holding the other back. Stebelkov, who had long ago
jumped up from the sofa and was listening delightedly, now darted to the
door and quite frankly jumped out to the corridor, right onto the neighbors.
Naturally, I also ran to the door. But his appearance in the corridor was like
a bucket of cold water: the women quickly disappeared and noisily
slammed the door behind them. Stebelkov was about to leap after them, but
paused, raising his finger, smiling, and thinking; this time I discerned
something extremely bad, dark, and sinister in his smile. Having spotted the
landlady, who was again standing by her door, he quickly ran to her on
tiptoe down the corridor; after exchanging whispers with her for about two
minutes and certainly receiving information, he came back to the room,
imposingly and resolutely now, took his top hat from the table, looked
fleetingly in the mirror, ruffled up his hair, and, with self-confident dignity,
not even glancing at me, went to the neighbors. He listened at the door for a
moment, putting his ear to it and winking victoriously to the landlady, who
shook her finger at him and wagged her head as if to say, “Ah, naughty boy,
naughty boy!” Finally, with a resolute but most delicate look, even as if
hunched over with delicacy, he rapped with his knuckles on the neighbors’
door. A voice was heard:

“Who’s there?”
“Will you allow me to come in on most important business?” Stebelkov
pronounced loudly and imposingly.
They did open, albeit slowly, just a little at first, a quarter; but Stebelkov
firmly seized the handle at once and would not have let the door close
again. A conversation began. Stebelkov spoke loudly, trying all the while to
push his way into the room; I don’t remember his words, but he spoke about
Versilov, saying that he could inform them, could explain everything—“no,
ma’am, just ask me,” “no, ma’am, just come to me”—along that line. They
very soon let him in. I went back to the sofa and tried to eavesdrop, but I
couldn’t make out everything, I only heard that Versilov was mentioned
frequently. By the tone of his voice, I guessed that Stebelkov was already in
control of the conversation, was already speaking not insinuatingly but
peremptorily, and sprawling as earlier with me: “do you follow,” “now
kindly get this,” and so on. However, he must have been extraordinarily
affable with the women. Twice already I had heard him guffaw loudly and,
probably, quite inappropriately, because along with his voice, and
sometimes overpowering his voice, I heard the voices of the two women,
which expressed no gaiety at all, mainly the young woman’s, the one who
had shrieked earlier; she spoke a lot, nervously, quickly, apparently
denouncing something and complaining, seeking justice and a judge. But
Stebelkov would not leave off, raised his voice more and more, and
guffawed more and more often; such people cannot listen to others. I soon
left the sofa, because it seemed shameful to me to eavesdrop, and moved to
my old place on the wicker chair by the window. I was convinced that Vasin
considered this man as nothing, but that if I were to declare the same
opinion, he would at once defend him with serious dignity and observe
didactically that he was “a practical man, one of those present-day
businesslike people, who cannot be judged from our general and abstract
points of view.” At that moment, however, I remember that I was all
somehow morally shattered, my heart was pounding, and I was undoubtedly
expecting something. Some ten minutes went by, and suddenly, right in the
middle of a rolling burst of laughter, someone shot up from the chair,
exactly as earlier, then I heard the cries of the two women, I heard

Stebelkov jump up as well and start saying something in a completely
different voice, as if vindicating himself, as if persuading them to listen to
him . . . But they didn’t listen; wrathful shouts came: “Out! you blackguard,
you shameless man!” In short, it was clear that he was being driven out. I
opened the door just at the moment when he leaped into the corridor from
the neighbors’ room, literally pushed, it seemed, by their hands. Seeing me,
he suddenly shouted, pointing at me:
“Here’s Versilov’s son! If you don’t believe me, then here’s his son, his
own son! If you please!” And he seized me peremptorily by the arm.
“This is his son, his own son!” he repeated, bringing me to the ladies,
adding nothing more, however, by way of explanation.
The young woman was standing in the corridor, the elderly one a step
behind her, in the doorway. I only remember that this poor girl was not badlooking, about twenty years old, but thin and sickly, with reddish hair and a
face that somewhat resembled my sister’s; this feature flashed and remained
in my memory; only Liza had never been and certainly never could be in
such a wrathful frenzy as this person who now stood before me: her lips
were white, her pale gray eyes flashed, she was trembling all over with
indignation. I also remember that I myself was in an extremely stupid and
undignified position, because I was decidedly unable to find anything to
say, thanks to this insolent fellow.
“So what if he’s his son! If he’s with you, he’s a blackguard. If you are
Versilov’s son,” she suddenly turned to me, “tell your father from me that
he’s a blackguard, that he’s an unworthy, shameless man, that I don’t need
his money . . . Take it, take it, take it, give him this money at once!”
She quickly pulled several banknotes out of her pocket, but the elderly
woman (that is, her mother, as it turned out later) seized her by the hand:
“Olya, maybe it’s not true, maybe he’s not his son!”
Olya quickly looked at her, understood, looked at me scornfully, and
went back into the room, but before slamming the door, standing on the

threshold, she once again shouted in frenzy at Stebelkov:
“Out!”
And she even stamped her foot at him. Then the door slammed and this
time was locked. Stebelkov, still holding me by the shoulder, raised his
finger and, extending his mouth into a long and pensive smile, rested his
questioning gaze on me.
“I find your action with me ridiculous and unworthy,” I muttered in
indignation.
But he wasn’t listening to me, though he didn’t take his eyes off me.
“This ought to be in-ves-tigated!” he said pensively.
“But, anyhow, how dared you drag me out? What is this? Who is that
woman? You seized me by the shoulder and led me—what’s going on
here?”
“Eh, the devil! Some sort of lost innocence . . . ‘the oft-repeated
exception’—do you follow?”
And he rested his finger on my chest.
“Eh, the devil!” I pushed his finger away.
But he suddenly and quite unexpectedly laughed softly, inaudibly,
lengthily, merrily. In the end he put on his hat and, his face changed and
now glum, observed, furrowing his brows:
“And the landlady ought to be instructed . . . they ought to be driven out
of the apartment—that’s what, and as soon as possible, otherwise they’ll . . .
You’ll see! Remember my words, you’ll see! Eh, the devil!” he suddenly
cheered up again, “so you’re waiting for Grisha?”
“No, I won’t wait any longer,” I answered resolutely.

“Well, it’s all one . . .”
And without adding another sound, he turned, walked out, and went
down the stairs without even deigning to look at the landlady, who was
obviously waiting for explanations and news. I also took my hat and, after
asking the landlady to report that I, Dolgoruky, had been there, ran down
the stairs.

III
I HAD MERELY wasted time. On coming out, I set off at once to look for
an apartment; but I was distracted, I wandered the streets for several hours
and, though I stopped at five or six places with rooms to let, I’m sure I went
past twenty without noticing them. To my still greater vexation, I had never
imagined that renting lodgings was so difficult. The rooms everywhere
were like Vasin’s, and even much worse, and the prices were enormous, that
is, not what I had reckoned on. I directly requested a corner,51 merely to be
able to turn around, and was given to know that in that case I should go “to
the corners.” Besides, there was a multitude of strange tenants everywhere,
whom by their looks alone I would have been unable to live next to; I
would even have paid not to live next to them. Some gentlemen without
frock coats, in waist-coats only, with disheveled beards, casual and curious.
There were about ten of them sitting in one tiny room over cards and beer,
and I was offered the room next door. In other places, I myself gave such
absurd answers to the landlords’ questions that they looked at me in
astonishment, and in one apartment I even had a quarrel. However, I can’t
really describe all these worthless things; I only want to say that, having
gotten very tired, I ate something in some cookshop when it was already
almost dark. I made a final resolve that I would go right now, by myself and
alone, give Versilov the letter about the inheritance (without any
explanations), pack my things upstairs into a suitcase and a bundle, and
move at least for that night to a hotel. I knew that at the end of Obukhovsky
Prospect, by the Triumphal Arch, there were inns where I could even get a
separate little room for thirty kopecks; I decided to sacrifice for one night,
only so as not to spend it at Versilov’s. And then, going past the
Technological Institute, it suddenly occurred to me for some reason to call

on Tatyana Pavlovna, who lived just there, across from the Institute. In fact,
the pretext for calling was the same letter of inheritance, but the insuperable
impulse to call on her had, of course, other reasons, which, however, I’m
unable to explain even now: there was some confusion of mind here about a
“nursing baby,” about “exceptions that make up the general rule.” Whether
I wanted to tell, or to show off, or to fight, or even to weep—I don’t know,
only I did go up to Tatyana Pavlovna’s. Till then I had only visited her once,
when I had just come from Moscow, on some errand from my mother, and I
remember that, having come and given what I was charged with, I left after
a minute, without even sitting down, and without her inviting me to.
I rang the bell, and the cook opened for me at once and silently let me in.
All these details are precisely needed, to make it possible to understand how
the crazy adventure could take place, which had such enormous influence
on all that came afterwards. And, first, about the cook. She was a spiteful,
snub-nosed Finn, who seemed to hate her mistress, Tatyana Pavlovna, who,
on the contrary, could not part with her, owing to some sort of partiality,
something like what old maids feel for wet-nosed pugs or eternally sleeping
cats. The Finn was either angry and rude, or, having quarreled, would be
silent for weeks on end in order to punish her lady. I must have hit on one
of those silent days, because even to my question, “Is the lady at home?”—
which I positively remember having asked her—she gave no reply and
silently went to her kitchen. After which, naturally convinced that the lady
was at home, I went in and, finding no one, began to wait, supposing that
Tatyana Pavlovna would presently come out of the bedroom; otherwise why
would the cook have let me in? I did not sit down and waited for two or
three minutes; it was almost evening, and Tatyana Pavlovna’s dark little
apartment looked still more cheerless because of the endless chintz that
hung everywhere. Two words about this vile little apartment, in order to
understand the terrain where the thing happened. Tatyana Pavlovna, with
her stubborn and imperious character, and as a result of her old landowning
preferences, could not have lived in furnished rooms along with other
tenants, and rented this parody of an apartment only so as to live separately
and be her own mistress. These two rooms were exactly like two canary
cages placed side by side, one smaller than the other, on the third floor, with
windows facing the courtyard. Entering the apartment, you stepped directly

into a narrow little corridor less than four feet wide, to the left were the
above-mentioned canary cages, and straight down the corridor, at the
bottom of it, was the door to the tiny kitchen. There might have been in
these little rooms the ten cubic feet of air a man needs for twelve hours, but
hardly more. They were grotesquely low, but the stupidest thing was that
the windows, the doors, the furniture—all, all of it was hung or upholstered
with chintz, fine French chintz, and adorned with little festoons; but this
made the room seem twice as dark and like the interior of a traveling coach.
In the room where I was waiting, you could still turn around, though it was
all cluttered with furniture, and, by the way, not bad furniture: there were
various little inlaid tables with bronze fittings, chests, an elegant and even
costly toilet table. But the next room, from which I expected her to come,
the bedroom, separated from this room by a heavy curtain, consisted, as it
turned out later, literally of nothing but a bed. All these details are necessary
in order to understand the stupid thing I did.
And so I was waiting and suspecting nothing, when the bell rang. I heard
the cook pass through the corridor with unhurried steps and silently, exactly
as with me earlier, let the people in. They were two ladies, and both were
talking loudly, but what was my amazement when I recognized by their
voices that one of them was Tatyana Pavlovna and the other precisely the
woman whom I was least of all prepared to meet now, and in such
circumstances at that! I couldn’t be mistaken: I had heard that sonorous,
strong, metallic voice yesterday, for only three minutes, true, but it had
remained in my soul. Yes, it was “yesterday’s woman.” What was I to do?
I’m not asking the reader this question, I’m only imagining that moment to
myself, and I’m utterly unable to explain even now how it happened that I
suddenly rushed behind the curtain and found myself in Tatyana Pavlovna’s
bedroom. In short, I hid, and barely had time to jump there as they came in.
Why I didn’t go to meet them, but hid myself—I don’t know. It all
happened accidentally, in the highest degree unaccountably.
Having jumped into the bedroom and stumbled over the bed, I noticed at
once that there was a door from the bedroom to the kitchen, which meant a
way out of my trouble and a possibility of escape, but—oh, horror!—the
door was locked and the key was not in the lock. I lowered myself onto the

bed in despair; I saw clearly that it meant I would now be eavesdropping,
and from the first phrases, from the first sounds of the conversation, I
realized that it was a secret and ticklish one. Oh, of course, an honest and
noble person ought to have gotten up, even now, come out and said loudly,
“I’m here, wait!”—and, despite his ridiculous position, walked past; but I
did not get up and come out; I didn’t dare, I turned coward in the meanest
way.
“My dear Katerina Nikolaevna, you upset me deeply,” Tatyana Pavlovna
implored. “Calm yourself once and for all, it doesn’t even suit your
character. Wherever you are, there is joy, and now suddenly . . . At least me,
I think, you continue to trust, knowing how devoted I am to you. Surely no
less than to Andrei Petrovich, to whom, once again, I do not conceal my
eternal devotion . . . Well, believe me, then, I swear to you on my honor, he
doesn’t have this document in his hands, and maybe no one does; and he’s
incapable of such skulduggery, it’s sinful of you even to suspect it. The two
of you have simply invented this hostility . . .”
“The document exists, and he is capable of anything. Why, I came in
yesterday and the first thing I met was ce petit espion27 that he foisted on
the prince.”
“Eh, ce petit espion. First of all, he’s not an espion at all, because it was I,
I who insisted on placing him with the prince, otherwise he’d go crazy in
Moscow, or starve to death—that was how they attested him from there;
and above all, the crude brat is even a perfect little fool, how could he be a
spy?”
“Yes, some little fool, which, however, doesn’t prevent him from
becoming a scoundrel. I was vexed yesterday, otherwise I’d have died of
laughter: he turned pale, rushed to me, bowed and scraped, spoke French.
And in Moscow, Marya Ivanovna assured me he was a genius. That this
unfortunate letter has survived and exists somewhere in a most dangerous
place—that I concluded mainly from Marya Ivanovna’s face.”
“My beauty! But you yourself said she had nothing!”

“The thing is that she has, she’s merely lying, and what a crafty one she
is, let me tell you! Back before Moscow I still had hopes that no papers had
been left, but here, here . . .”
“Ah, my dear, on the contrary, they say she’s a kind and sensible being,
Andronikov valued her above any of his nieces. True, I don’t know her that
well, but—you could seduce her, my beauty! It’s nothing for you to win
people over, I’m an old woman and here I am in love with you, and in a
minute I’ll start kissing you . . . Well, what would it cost you to seduce
her!”
“I tried to seduce her, Tatyana Pavlovna, I did, I even sent her into
raptures, but she’s also very clever . . . No, there’s a whole character here,
and a special one, a Moscow one . . . And imagine, she advised me to
address a certain man here, Kraft, Andronikov’s former assistant, she said
he might know something. I already have an idea of this Kraft, and I even
remember him fleetingly; but when she told me about this Kraft, I became
convinced at once that it wasn’t simply that she didn’t know, but that she
was lying and knew everything.”
“But why, why? Anyway, perhaps it might be possible to consult him!
He’s German, this Kraft, not a babbler, and, as I recall, a most honest man
—really, why not question him! Only it seems he’s not in Petersburg now . .
.”
“Oh, he came back yesterday, I was just at his place . . . I’ve come
precisely to you in such anxiety, my arms and legs are trembling, I wanted
to ask you, my angel, Tatyana Pavlovna, since you know everybody,
couldn’t we find out from his papers at least, because surely he left some
papers, so where would they go now from him? Perhaps they’ll fall into
dangerous hands again? I’ve come running to ask your advice.”
“What papers do you mean?” Tatyana Pavlovna did not understand. “And
you say you yourself were just at Kraft’s?”
“I was, I was, just now, but he shot himself. Yesterday evening.”

I jumped up from the bed. I could sit it out when they called me a spy
and an idiot; and the further they went in their conversation, the less
possible it seemed for me to appear. It would have been unimaginable! I
had decided to myself that I would sit it out, with a sinking heart, until
Tatyana Pavlovna sent her visitor away (if I was lucky and she didn’t come
into the bedroom earlier for something), and later, once Mme. Akhmakov
was gone, I might just have a fight then with Tatyana Pavlovna! . . . But
suddenly now, when I heard about Kraft, I jumped up from the bed, I was
all seized as if by a convulsion. Not thinking of anything, not reasoning or
imagining, I took a step, raised the portière, and appeared before the two of
them. There was still enough light for them to make me out, pale and
trembling . . . They both screamed. How could they not?
“Kraft?” I murmured, addressing Mme. Akhmakov. “Shot himself?
Yesterday? At sunset?”
“Where were you? Where did you come from?” shrieked Tatyana
Pavlovna, and she literally clutched my shoulder. “Have you been spying?
Eavesdropping?”
“What was I just telling you?” Katerina Nikolaevna got up from the sofa,
pointing at me.
I lost my temper.
“Lies, nonsense!” I interrupted her furiously. “You just called me a spy,
oh, God! Is it worth not only spying, but even living in the world alongside
such people as you? A magnanimous man commits suicide; Kraft has shot
himself—because of an idea, because of Hecuba . . . However, you don’t
know about Hecuba!52 . . . And here—go and live amidst your intrigues,
hang around with your lies, deceptions, snares . . . Enough!”
“Slap his face! Slap his face!” cried Tatyana Pavlovna, and since
Katerina Nikolaevna, though she looked at me (I remember it all down to
the smallest trace) without taking her eyes away, didn’t move from her
place, Tatyana Pavlovna would probably have carried out her own advice in

a moment, so that I inadvertently raised my hand to protect my face; and
from this gesture it seemed to her that I was swinging my own arm.
“Yes, hit me, hit me! Prove you’re a born lout! You’re stronger than
women, why stand on ceremony!”
“Enough of your slander, enough!” I cried. “I’ve never raised my hand
against a woman! You’re shameless, Tatyana Pavlovna, you’ve always
despised me. Oh, one must deal with people without respecting them! You,
Katerina Nikolaevna, are probably laughing at my figure; yes, God hasn’t
given me a figure like your adjutants. And, nevertheless, I don’t feel
humiliated before you, but, on the contrary, exalted . . . Well, it makes no
difference how it’s expressed, only I’m not to blame! I wound up here
accidentally, Tatyana Pavlovna, the one to blame is your Finnish cook, or,
better to say, your partiality for her: why did she refuse to answer my
question and bring me straight here? And then, you must agree, it seemed
so monstrueuse28 to me to come jumping out of a woman’s bedroom, that I
decided sooner to endure your spitting silently than to show myself . . .
You’re laughing again, Katerina Nikolaevna?”
“Get out, get out, go away!” cried Tatyana Pavlovna, almost pushing me.
“Don’t take his pack of lies for anything, Katerina Nikolaevna, I told you
they attested him as crazy there!”
“As crazy? There? Who would that be, and from where? Enough, it
makes no difference. Katerina Nikolaevna! I swear to you by all that’s holy,
this conversation and all that I’ve heard will remain between us . . . Is it my
fault that I learned your secrets? The more so as I’m ending my work with
your father tomorrow, so that, as regards the document you’re looking for,
you may be at peace!”
“What’s that? . . . What document are you talking about?” Katerina
Nikolaevna was at a loss, so much so that she even turned pale, or maybe it
just seemed so to me. I realized that I had said too much.

I left quickly; they followed me silently with their eyes, and there was the
highest degree of astonishment in their gaze. In short, I had set them a
riddle . . .

Chapter Nine
I
I WAS HURRYING home and—wondrous thing—I was very pleased with
myself. Of course, one doesn’t speak that way with women, and with such
women at that—or, more precisely, with such a woman, because I didn’t
count Tatyana Pavlovna. Maybe it’s quite impossible to tell a woman of that
category to her face: “I spit on your intrigues,” but I had said it and was
pleased precisely with that. Not to mention other things, I was sure at least
that by that tone I had blotted out all that was ridiculous in my position. But
I had no time to think very much about it: Kraft was sitting in my head. Not
that he tormented me so much, but all the same I was shaken to my
foundations; and even to the point that the ordinary human feeling of a
certain pleasure at another’s misfortune, that is, when somebody breaks a
leg, loses his honor or a beloved being, and so on, even that ordinary feeling
of mean satisfaction yielded in me without a trace to another extremely
wholesome sensation, namely grief, regret for Kraft, that is, I don’t know
whether it was regret, but some very strong and kindly feeling. I was also
very pleased by that. It’s astonishing how many extraneous thoughts can
flash through your mind precisely when you’re all shaken by some colossal
news, which in reality, it seems, ought to overpower all other feelings and
scatter all extraneous thoughts, especially petty ones; but it’s the petty ones,
on the contrary, that get at you. I also remember that I was gradually
overcome by a rather palpable nervous trembling, which went on for
several minutes, and even all the while I was at home and having a talk with
Versilov.
This talk took place under strange and extraordinary circumstances. I
have already mentioned that we lived in a separate wing in the yard; this
apartment bore the sign of number thirteen. Even before I went through the
gate, I heard a woman’s voice asking someone loudly, with impatience and
vexation, “Where’s apartment number thirteen?” It was a lady asking, just

by the gate, opening the door of a grocery shop; but it seems they gave her
no reply or even chased her away, and she was coming down the steps in
distress and anger.
“But where’s the caretaker here?” she cried, stamping her foot. I had long
since recognized the voice.
“I’m going to apartment number thirteen,” I went up to her, “whom do
you want?”
“For a whole hour I’ve been looking for the caretaker, I’ve asked
everybody, climbed all the stairs.”
“It’s in the yard. Don’t you recognize me?”
But she had already recognized me.
“You want Versilov; you have business with him, and so do I,” I went on.
“I’ve come to say good-bye to him forever. Come along.”
“Are you his son?”
“That means nothing. However, let’s suppose I am his son, though my
name is Dolgoruky. I’m illegitimate. This gentleman has endless
illegitimate children. When conscience and honor demand, a son can leave
home. It’s in the Bible.53 Besides, he got an inheritance, but I don’t want
my share, I go by the labor of my hands. When need be, a magnanimous
man even sacrifices his life; Kraft shot himself, Kraft, because of an idea,
imagine, a young man, who gave one hopes . . . This way, this way! We’re
in a separate wing. It’s in the Bible that children leave their fathers and start
their own nest . . . If an idea beckons . . . if there’s an idea! The idea’s the
main thing, the idea’s everything . . .”
I babbled to her like that all the while we were climbing up to our place.
The reader has probably noticed that I don’t spare myself much and, where
needed, give myself an excellent attestation: I want to learn to tell the truth.
Versilov was at home. I came in, but didn’t take off my coat, and neither did

she. Her clothes were terribly flimsy: over a dark dress hung a scrap of
something intended to be a cape or a mantilla; on her head was an old,
peeling sailor hat, very unbecoming to her. When we entered the drawing
room, my mother was sitting in her usual place over her work, and my sister
came out of her room and stopped in the doorway. Versilov was doing
nothing, as usual, and rose to meet us; he fixed me with a stern, questioning
look.
“I have nothing to do with it.” I hastened to wave it away and stood to
one side. “I met this person by the gate; she was looking for you, and
nobody could direct her. I’ve come on business of my own, which I shall
have the pleasure of explaining after her . . .”
Versilov nevertheless went on looking at me curiously.
“Permit me,” the girl began impatiently. Versilov turned to her. “I’ve long
been thinking about why you decided to leave money with me yesterday . . .
I . . . in short . . . Here’s your money!” she almost shrieked, as earlier, and
flung a wad of banknotes on the table. “I had to look for you through the
address bureau, otherwise I’d have brought it sooner. Listen, you!” She
suddenly turned to my mother, who became all pale. “I don’t want to insult
you, you have an honest look and maybe this is even your daughter. I don’t
know if you’re his wife, but you should know that this gentleman cuts out
newspaper advertisements that governesses and teachers publish with their
last money, and goes to these unfortunate women, looking for a
dishonorable profit and getting them into trouble through money. I don’t
understand how I could have taken money from him yesterday! He looked
so honest! . . . Away, not one word! You’re a blackguard, my dear sir! Even
if you had honest intentions, I don’t want your charity. Not a word! Not a
word! Oh, how glad I am to have exposed you now in front of your women!
A curse on you!”
She quickly ran out, but turned on the threshold for a moment, only to
shout:
“They say you’ve received an inheritance!”

And then she vanished like a shadow. I remind you once more: she was
beside herself. Versilov was deeply struck; he stood as if pondering and
trying to understand; at last he turned suddenly to me:
“You don’t know her at all?”
“Earlier today I accidentally saw her raging in the corridor at Vasin’s,
shrieking and cursing you; but I didn’t get into conversation with her and
know nothing, and just now we met by the gate. She’s probably yesterday’s
teacher ‘who gives lessons in arithmetic’?”
“The very same. Once in my life I did a good deed and . . . But, anyhow,
what have you got?”
“Here’s this letter,” I answered. “I consider it unnecessary to explain: it
comes from Kraft, who got it from the late Andronikov. You’ll find out
from the contents. I’ll add that no one in the whole world knows of this
letter now except me, because Kraft, having given me the letter yesterday,
shot himself just after I left . . .”
While I spoke, breathless and hurrying, he took the letter and, holding it
out in his left hand, watched me attentively. When I announced Kraft’s
suicide to him, I peered into his face with particular attention to see the
effect. And what?—the news didn’t make the slightest impression on him;
he didn’t even raise his eyebrows! On the contrary, seeing that I had
stopped, he pulled out his lorgnette, which never left him and hung on a
black ribbon, brought the letter over to a candle, and, after glancing at the
signature, began to study it closely. I can’t express how I was even offended
by this arrogant unfeelingness. He must have known Kraft very well;
besides, it was in any case such extraordinary news! Finally, I naturally
wanted it to produce an effect. Having waited for half a minute, and
knowing that the letter was long, I turned and went out. My suitcase had
long been ready, I only had to pack several things into a bundle. I thought of
my mother and that I had not gone over to her. Ten minutes later, when I
was quite ready and wanted to go for a cab, my sister came into my room.

“Here, mama sends you your sixty roubles and again asks you to forgive
her for having told Andrei Petrovich about it, and there’s another twenty
roubles. You gave her fifty roubles yesterday for your keep; mother says it’s
simply impossible to take more than thirty from you, because she hadn’t
spent fifty on you, so she’s sending you twenty roubles in change.”
“Well, thanks, if only she’s telling the truth. Good-bye, sister, I’m going
away!”
“Where to now?”
“To an inn for the time being, only so as not to spend the night in this
house. Tell mama that I love her.”
“She knows that. She knows that you also love Andrei Petrovich. You
ought to be ashamed to have brought that unfortunate girl!”
“I swear to you, it wasn’t me; I met her by the gate.”
“No, you brought her.”
“I assure you . . .”
“Think, ask yourself, and you’ll see that you, too, were the reason.”
“I was only very glad that Versilov was disgraced. Imagine, he has a
nursing baby by Lydia Akhmakov . . . however, why am I telling you . . .”
“He has? A nursing baby? But it’s not his baby! Where did you hear such
a lie?”
“Well, as if you’d know.”
“Who else should know? It was I who took care of this baby in Luga.
Listen, brother: I saw long ago that you know nothing about anything, and
yet you insult Andrei Petrovich, well, and mama, too.”

“If he’s right, then I’ll be wrong, that’s all, and I don’t love you any less.
Why did you blush so, sister? And still more now! Well, all right, but even
so I’ll challenge that princeling to a duel for Versilov’s slap in Ems. The
more so if Versilov was in the right with Miss Akhmakov.”
“Brother, come to your senses, really!”
“Since the court has now closed the case . . . Well, and now you’ve
turned pale.”
“But the prince won’t fight a duel with you,” Liza smiled a pale smile
through her fright.
“Then I’ll disgrace him publicly. What’s wrong, Liza?”
She became so pale that she couldn’t stand on her feet and lowered
herself onto the sofa.
“Liza!” mother called from downstairs.
She put herself to rights and stood up; she was smiling tenderly at me.
“Brother, leave these trifles, or wait for a while, till you learn much more:
you know so terribly little.”
“I’ll remember, Liza, that you turned pale when you learned I’d be going
to a duel!”
“Yes, yes, remember that, too!” she smiled once more in farewell and
went downstairs.
I called a cab and, with the driver’s help, carried my things out of the
apartment. None of my family opposed me or stopped me. I did not go to
say good-bye to my mother, so as not to meet Versilov. When I was already
sitting in the cab, a thought suddenly flashed in me.
“To the Fontanka, the Semyonovsky Bridge,” I ordered suddenly, and
went to Vasin’s again.

II
IT SUDDENLY OCCURRED to me that Vasin already knew about Kraft,
and maybe a hundred times more than I did; and that’s how it turned out to
be. Vasin at once and dutifully told me all the details—without great
warmth, however; I concluded that he was tired, and so he was. He had
been at Kraft’s himself that morning. Kraft had shot himself with a revolver
(that same one) the night before, in full darkness, as was made clear by his
diary. The last entry in the diary was made just before the shot, and he notes
in it that he was writing almost in the dark, barely making out the letters;
and he didn’t want to light a candle for fear of leaving a fire behind him.
“And I don’t want to light it, only to put it out again before the shot, like my
life,” he added strangely in almost the last line. He had undertaken this
death diary two days earlier, as soon as he returned to Petersburg, before the
visit to Dergachev; after I left, he wrote in it every quarter of an hour; the
very last three or four entries were written every five minutes. I voiced my
surprise that Vasin, having had this diary under his eyes for so long (it was
given him to read), had not made a copy, the more so as it was no more than
a printer’s sheet in all, and the entries were short—“at least the last page!”
Vasin observed to me with a smile that he remembered it as it was, and
moreover the notes were without any system, about whatever came to mind.
I tried to argue that that was the precious thing in this case, but dropped it
and began pestering him to remember at least something, and he
remembered several lines, about an hour before the shot, saying “that he
had chills; that he contemplated drinking a glass in order to warm up, but
the thought that it would perhaps cause a bigger hemorrhage stopped
him.”—“It’s almost all that sort of thing,” concluded Vasin.
“And you call that trifles!” I exclaimed.
“When did I call it that? I simply didn’t make a copy. But though it’s not
trifles, the diary is actually quite ordinary, or, rather, natural, that is,
precisely as it ought to be in this case . . .”
“But it’s his last thoughts, his last thoughts!”

“Last thoughts can sometimes be extremely insignificant. One such
suicide precisely complains in the same sort of diary that at such an
important hour at least one ‘lofty thought’ should have visited him, but, on
the contrary, they were all petty and empty.”
“And that he had chills is also an empty thought?”
“That is, you mean the chills proper, or the hemorrhage? Yet it’s a known
fact that a great many of those who are capable of contemplating their
imminent death, self-willed or not, are quite often inclined to be concerned
with the handsome appearance in which their corpse will be left. In this
sense, Kraft, too, feared an excessive hemorrhage.”
“I don’t know whether that’s a known fact . . . or whether it’s so,” I
murmured, “but I’m surprised that you consider it all so natural, and yet
was it long ago that Kraft spoke, worried, sat among us? Can it be that
you’re not at least sorry for him?”
“Oh, of course I’m sorry for him, and that’s quite another matter; but in
any case Kraft himself pictured his death as a logical conclusion. It turns
out that everything said about him at Dergachev’s was correct: he left
behind a notebook this big, full of learned conclusions, based on
phrenology, craniology, and even mathematics, proving that the Russians
are a second-rate breed of people, and that, consequently, it’s not at all
worth living as a Russian. If you wish, what’s most characteristic here is
that it’s possible to draw any logical conclusion you like, but to up and
shoot oneself as the result of a conclusion—that, of course, doesn’t happen
all the time.”
“At least we must give credit to his character.”
“And maybe not only that,” Vasin observed evasively, but clearly he had
in mind stupidity or weakness of reason. All this irritated me.
“You yourself spoke about feelings yesterday, Vasin.”

“Nor do I deny them now; but in view of the accomplished fact,
something in him presents itself as so badly mistaken that a severe view of
the matter somehow unwillingly drives out pity itself.”
“You know, I could tell earlier by your eyes that you would revile Kraft,
and so as not to hear it, I decided not to seek your opinion; but you’ve
voiced it yourself, and I’m unwillingly forced to agree with you; but still
I’m displeased with you! I feel sorry for Kraft!”
“You know, we’ve gone too far . . .”
“Yes, yes,” I interrupted, “but it’s comforting at least that in such cases
those who are left alive, the judges of the deceased, can always say of
themselves, ‘Though the man who shot himself was worthy of all regret and
indulgence, we’re still left, and therefore there’s no point in grieving too
much.’”
“Yes, naturally, if you see it from that angle . . . Ah, yes, it seems you
were joking! And most wittily. This is my tea time and I’ll have it brought
at once—you’ll probably keep me company.”
And he went out, measuring my suitcase and bundle with his eyes.
I actually had wanted to say something malicious, in revenge for Kraft;
and I had said it as I could, but, curiously, he had first taken my thought that
“the likes of us are left ” as serious. But be that as it may, he was still more
right than I in everything, even feelings. I admitted all that without any
displeasure, but I decidedly felt that I did not like him.
When tea was brought, I explained to him that I was asking for his
hospitality for only one night, and that if it was impossible, he should say so
and I would move to the inn. Then I briefly told him my reasons, stating
simply and directly that I had quarreled definitively with Versilov, without
going into details. Vasin listened attentively, but without any emotion.
Generally, he only answered questions, though he answered affably and
with sufficient fullness. I passed over in total silence the letter with which I
had come to him previously to ask for advice; and I explained my previous

call as a simple visit. Having given Versilov my word that no one would
know of the letter besides me, I considered myself as no longer having the
right to tell anyone about it. For some reason it became particularly
repugnant to me to inform Vasin of certain things. Of certain things, but not
of others: I still managed to get him interested in my stories about those
scenes in the corridor and with the women in the neighboring room,
culminating in Versilov’s apartment. He listened with great attention,
especially about Stebelkov. He asked me to repeat twice how Stebelkov
inquired about Dergachev, and he even fell to pondering; however, he still
smiled in the end. It suddenly seemed to me at that moment that nothing
could ever disconcert Vasin; however, the first thought of it, I remember,
presented itself to me in a form quite flattering to him.
“Generally, I couldn’t gather much from what Mr. Stebelkov said,” I
concluded about Stebelkov. “He speaks somehow confusedly . . . and there
seemed to be something light-minded in him . . .”
Vasin immediately assumed a serious look.
“He indeed has no gift of eloquence, but that’s only at first sight. He has
managed to make extremely apt observations; and generally—these are
more people of business, of affairs, than of generalizing thought; they
should be judged from that angle . . .”
Exactly as I had guessed earlier.
“Anyhow he acted up terribly at your neighbors’, and God knows how it
might have ended.”
About the neighbors, Vasin told me that they had lived there for about
three weeks and had come from somewhere in the provinces; that their
room was extremely small, and everything indicated that they were very
poor; that they were sitting and waiting for something. He didn’t know that
the young one had advertised in the newspapers as a teacher, but he had
heard that Versilov had visited them; this had happened while he was away,
and the landlady had told him. The neighbors, on the contrary, avoided
everybody, even the landlady herself. In the last few days he had begun to

notice that something was indeed not right with them, but there had been no
such scenes as today’s. All this talk of ours about the neighbors I recall now
with a view to what followed; meanwhile a dead silence reigned behind
their door. Vasin listened with particular interest when I said that Stebelkov
thought it necessary to talk with the landlady about them, and that he had
twice repeated, “You’ll see, you’ll see!”
“And you will see,” Vasin added, “that it didn’t come into his head for
nothing; he has a very keen eye in that regard.”
“So, then, in your opinion, the landlady should be advised to throw them
out?”
“No, I’m not saying they should be thrown out, but so that some sort of
story doesn’t happen . . . However, all such stories end one way or another .
. . Let’s drop it.”
As for Versilov’s visit to the women, he resolutely refused to offer any
conclusion.
“Everything is possible; the man felt money in his pocket . . . However,
it’s also probable that he simply offered charity; it suits his tradition, and
maybe also his inclination.”
I told him what Stebelkov had babbled that day about the “nursing baby.”
“Stebelkov in this case is completely mistaken,” Vasin said with
particular seriousness and particular emphasis (and that I remember all too
well).
“Stebelkov,” he went on, “sometimes trusts all too much in his practical
sense, and because of that rushes to a conclusion in accordance with his
logic, which is often quite perspicacious; yet the event may in fact have a
much more fantastic and unexpected coloration, considering the characters
involved. And so it happened here: having partial knowledge of the matter,
he concluded that the baby belongs to Versilov; however, the baby is not
Versilov’s.”

I latched on to him, and here is what I learned, to my great astonishment:
the baby was Prince Sergei Sokolsky’s. Lydia Akhmakov, either owing to
her illness, or simply because of her fantastic character, sometimes behaved
like a crazy woman. She became infatuated with the prince still before
Versilov, and the prince “had no qualms about accepting her love,” as Vasin
put it. The liaison lasted only a moment: they quarreled, as is already
known, and Lydia chased the prince away, “of which, it seems, the man was
glad.”
“She was a very strange girl,” Vasin added, “it’s even very possible that
she was not always in her right mind. But, as he was leaving for Paris, the
prince had no idea of the condition in which he had left his victim, and he
didn’t know it to the very end, until his return. Versilov, having become the
young person’s friend, offered to marry her precisely in view of the
emergent circumstance (which it seems the parents did not suspect almost
to the end). The enamored girl was delighted, and saw in Versilov’s
proposal ‘not only his self-sacrifice,’ which, however, she also appreciated.
However, he certainly knew how to do it,” Vasin added. “The baby, a girl,
was born a month or six weeks before term, was placed somewhere in
Germany, then Versilov took it back, and it is now somewhere in Russia,
maybe in Petersburg.”
“And the phosphorus matches?”
“I know nothing about that,” concluded Vasin. “Lydia Akhmakov died
two weeks after the delivery; what happened there—I don’t know. The
prince, only just returned from Paris, found out that there was a baby, and, it
seems, did not believe at first that it was his . . . Generally, the story is kept
secret on all sides even to this day.”
“But how about this prince!” I cried in indignation. “How about the way
he behaved with the sick girl!”
“She wasn’t so sick then . . . Besides, she chased him away herself . . .
True, maybe he was unnecessarily quick to take advantage of his
dismissal.”

“You vindicate such a scoundrel?”
“No, I merely don’t call him a scoundrel. There’s much else here besides
direct meanness. Generally, it’s a very ordinary affair.”
“Tell me, Vasin, did you know him closely? I’d especially like to trust
your opinion, in view of a circumstance that concerns me greatly.”
But here Vasin’s answers became somehow all too restrained. He knew
the prince, but with obvious deliberateness he said nothing about the
circumstances under which he had made his acquaintance. Next he said that
his character was such that he merited a certain indulgence. “He’s full of
honest inclinations and he’s impressionable, but he possesses neither the
sense nor the strength of will to sufficiently control his desires. He’s an
uneducated man; there is a host of ideas and phenomena that are beyond
him, and yet he throws himself upon them. For instance, he would
insistently maintain something like this: ‘I am a prince and a descendant of
Rurik,54 but why shouldn’t I be a shoemaker’s apprentice, if I have to earn
my bread and am incapable of doing anything else? My shingle will say:
“Prince So-and-so, Shoemaker”—it’s even noble.’ He’ll say it, and he’ll do
it—that’s the main thing,” Vasin added, “and yet there’s no strength of
conviction here, but just the most light-minded impressionability. But
afterwards repentance would undoubtedly come, and then he would always
be ready for some totally contrary extreme; and so for his whole life. In our
age many people come a cropper like that,” Vasin concluded, “precisely
because they were born in our time.”
I involuntarily fell to thinking.
“Is it true that he was thrown out of his regiment earlier?” I inquired.
“I don’t know if he was thrown out, but he did indeed leave the regiment
on account of some unpleasantness. Is it known to you that last autumn,
precisely being retired, he spent two or three months in Luga?”
“I . . . I knew that you were living in Luga then.”

“Yes, I, too, for a while. The prince was also acquainted with Lizaveta
Makarovna.”
“Oh? I didn’t know. I confess, I’ve spoken so little with my sister . . . But
can it be that he was received in my mother’s house?” I cried.
“Oh, no. He was too distantly acquainted, through a third house.”
“Yes, what was it my sister told me about this baby? Wasn’t the baby in
Luga as well?”
“For a while.”
“And where is it now?”
“Undoubtedly in Petersburg.”
“Never in my life will I believe,” I cried in extreme agitation, “that my
mother participated in any way in this story with this Lydia!”
“Apart from all these intrigues, which I don’t undertake to sort out, the
personal role of Versilov in this story had nothing particularly reprehensible
about it,” Vasin observed, smiling condescendingly. It was apparently
becoming hard for him to speak with me, only he didn’t let it show.
“Never, never will I believe,” I cried again, “that a woman could give up
her husband to another woman, that I will not believe! . . . I swear that my
mother did not participate in it!”
“It seems, however, that she didn’t oppose it.”
“In her place, out of pride alone, I wouldn’t have opposed it!”
“For my part, I absolutely refuse to judge in such a matter,” Vasin
concluded.
Indeed, Vasin, for all his intelligence, may have had no notion of women,
so that a whole cycle of ideas and phenomena remained unknown to him. I

fell silent. Vasin was working temporarily in a joint-stock company, and I
knew that he brought work home. To my insistent question, he confessed
that he had work then, too, some accounts, and I warmly begged him not to
stand on ceremony with me. That seemed to afford him pleasure; but before
sitting down with his papers, he began to make a bed for me on the sofa.
First of all he tried to yield me his bed, but when I didn’t accept, that also
seemed to please him. He obtained a pillow and a blanket from the
landlady. Vasin was extremely polite and amiable, but it was somehow hard
for me to see him going to such trouble on my account. I had liked it better
when once, about three weeks ago, I had chanced to spend the night on the
Petersburg side, at Efim’s. I remember him concocting a bed for me, also on
a sofa and in secret from his aunt, supposing for some reason that she would
get angry on learning that his comrades came to spend the night. We
laughed a lot, spread out a shirt instead of a sheet, and folded an overcoat
for a pillow. I remember Zverev, when he had finished work, giving the sofa
a loving flick and saying to me:
“Vous dormirez comme un petit roi.”29
Both his stupid gaiety and the French phrase, which suited him like a
saddle on a cow, had the result that I slept with extreme pleasure then at this
buffoon’s place. As for Vasin, I was extremely glad when he finally sat
down to work, his back turned to me. I sprawled on the sofa and, looking at
his back, thought long and about much.

III
AND THERE WAS plenty to think about. My soul was very troubled, and
there was nothing whole in it; but some sensations stood out very definitely,
though no one of them drew me fully to itself, owing to their abundance.
Everything flashed somehow without connection or sequence, and I
remember that I myself had no wish to stop at anything or introduce any
sequence. Even the idea of Kraft moved imperceptibly into the background.
What excited me most of all was my own situation, that here I had already
“broken away,” and my suitcase was with me, and I wasn’t at home, and
was beginning everything entirely anew. Just as if up to now all my

intentions and preparations had been a joke, and only “now, suddenly and,
above all, unexpectedly, everything had begun in reality.” This idea
heartened me and, however troubled my soul was about many things,
cheered me up. But . . . but there were other sensations as well; one of them
especially wanted to distinguish itself from the others and take possession
of my soul, and, strangely, this sensation also heartened me, as if
summoning me to something terribly gay. It began, however, with fear: I
had been afraid for a long while, since that very moment earlier when, in
my fervor and taken unawares, I had told Mme. Akhmakov too much about
the document. “Yes, I said too much,” I thought, “and perhaps they’ll guess
something . . . that’s bad! Naturally, they won’t leave me in peace if they
begin to suspect, but . . . let them! Perhaps they won’t even find me—I’ll
hide! But what if they really start running after me . . .” And then I began to
recall down to the last detail and with growing pleasure how I had stood
before Katerina Nikolaevna and how her bold but terribly astonished eyes
had looked straight at me. And I had gone out leaving her in that
astonishment, I recalled; “her eyes are not quite black, however . . . only her
eyelashes are very black, that’s what makes her eyes, too, look so dark . . .”
And suddenly, I remember, it became terribly loathsome for me to recall .
. . and I was vexed and sickened, both at them and at myself. I reproached
myself for something and tried to think about other things. “Why is it that I
don’t feel the least indignation at Versilov for the story with the woman
next door?” suddenly came into my head. For my part, I was firmly
convinced that his role here had been amorous and that he had come in
order to have some fun, but that in itself did not make me indignant. It even
seemed to me that he couldn’t be imagined otherwise, and though I really
was glad that he had been disgraced, I didn’t blame him. That was not
important for me. What was important for me was that he had looked at me
so angrily when I came in with the woman, looked at me as he never had
before. “He finally looked at me seriously!” I thought, and my heart stood
still. Oh, if I hadn’t loved him, I wouldn’t have been so glad of his hatred!
I finally dozed off and fell sound asleep. I only remember through my
sleep that Vasin, having finished his work, put things away neatly, gave my

sofa an intent look, undressed, and blew out the candle. It was past
midnight.

IV
ALMOST EXACTLY TWO hours later I awoke with a start like a halfwit
and sat up on my sofa. Dreadful cries, weeping and howling, were coming
from behind the neighbors’ door. Our door was wide open, and in the
already lighted corridor people were shouting and running. I was about to
call Vasin, but guessed that he was no longer in bed. Not knowing where to
find matches, I felt for my clothes and hurriedly began to dress in the
darkness. The landlady, and maybe also the tenants, had obviously come
running to the neighbors’ room. One voice was screaming, however, that of
the elderly woman, while yesterday’s youthful voice, which I remembered
only too well, was completely silent; I remember that that was the first
thought that came to my head then. Before I had time to dress, Vasin came
hurrying in; instantly, with an accustomed hand, he found the matches and
lighted the room. He was only in his underwear, dressing gown, and
slippers, and he immediately began to dress.
“What’s happened?” I cried to him.
“A most unpleasant and troublesome business!” he replied almost
angrily. “This young neighbor, the one you were telling me about, has
hanged herself in her room.”
I let out a cry. I can’t convey how much my heart was wrung! We ran out
to the corridor. I confess, I didn’t dare go into the women’s room, and I saw
the unfortunate girl only later, when she had been taken down, and then, to
tell the truth, at some distance, covered with a sheet, from under which the
two narrow soles of her shoes stuck out. For some reason I never looked at
her face. The mother was in a dreadful state; our landlady was with her, not
much frightened, however. All the tenants of the apartments came crowding
around. There weren’t many: only one elderly sailor, always very gruff and
demanding, though now he became very quiet; and some people from Tver
province, an old man and woman, husband and wife, quite respectable and

civil-service people. I won’t describe the rest of that night, the fuss, and
then the official visits; till dawn I literally shivered and considered it my
duty not to go to bed, though, anyhow, I didn’t do anything. And everybody
had an extremely brisk look, even somehow especially brisk. Vasin even
drove off somewhere. The landlady turned out to be a rather respectable
woman, much better than I had supposed her to be. I persuaded her (and I
put it down to my credit) that the mother couldn’t be left like that, alone
with her daughter’s corpse, and that she should take her to her room at least
till the next day. She agreed at once and, no matter how the mother thrashed
and wept, refusing to leave the corpse, in the end, nevertheless, she still
moved in with the landlady, who at once ordered the samovar prepared.
After that, the tenants went to their rooms and closed the doors, but I still
wouldn’t go to bed and sat for a long time at the landlady’s, who was even
glad of an extra person, and one who could, for his part, tell a thing or two
about the matter. The samovar proved very useful, and generally the
samovar is a most necessary Russian thing, precisely in all catastrophes and
misfortunes, especially terrible, unexpected, and eccentric ones; even the
mother had two cups, of course after extreme entreaties and almost by
force. And yet, sincerely speaking, I had never seen more bitter and outright
grief than when I looked at this unfortunate woman. After the first bursts of
sobbing and hysterics, she even began speaking eagerly, and I listened
greedily to her account. There are unfortunate people, especially among
women, for whom it is even necessary that they be allowed to speak as
much as possible in such cases. Besides, there are characters that are, so to
speak, all too worn down by grief, who have suffered all their lives long,
who have endured extremely much both from great griefs and from constant
little ones, and whom nothing can surprise anymore, no sort of unexpected
catastrophes, and who, above all, even before the coffin of the most beloved
being, do not forget a single one of the so-dearly-paid-for rules of
ingratiating behavior with people. And I don’t condemn them; it’s not the
banality of egoism or coarseness of development; in these hearts maybe one
can find even more gold than in the most noble-looking heroines; but the
habit of longtime abasement, the instinct of self-preservation, a long
intimidation and inhibition finally take their toll. The poor suicide did not
resemble her mother in this. Their faces, however, seemed to resemble each
other, though the dead girl was positively not bad-looking. The mother was

not yet a very old woman, only about fifty, also blond, but with hollow eyes
and cheeks, and with big, uneven yellow teeth. And everything in her had
some tinge of yellowness: the skin of her face and hands was like
parchment; her dark dress was so threadbare that it also looked quite
yellow; and the nail on the index finger of her right hand was, I don’t know
why, plastered over thoroughly and neatly with yellow wax.
The poor woman’s story was incoherent in some places. I’ll tell it as I
understood it and as I have remembered it.

V
THEY CAME FROM Moscow. She had long been a widow, “though the
widow of a court councillor,”55 her husband had been in the service, left
almost nothing “except two hundred roubles, though, in a pension. Well,
what is two hundred roubles?” She raised Olya, though, and had her
educated in high school . . . “And how she studied, how she studied; she
was awarded a silver medal at graduation . . .” (Long tears here, naturally.)
The deceased husband had lost nearly four thousand in capital with one
merchant here in Petersburg. Suddenly this merchant became rich again. “I
had papers, got some advice, they said, ‘Make a claim, you’re sure to get
everything . . .’ So I began, and the merchant started to agree. ‘Go in
person,’ they said. Olya and I made ready and came a month ago now. Our
means were only so much; we took this room because it was the smallest,
and we saw it was an honorable house, and that was the most important
thing for us. We’re inexperienced women, anybody can offend us. Well, we
paid you for a month, with one thing and another, Petersburg’s expensive,
our merchant flatly refused us. ‘I don’t know who you are,’ and the paper I
had was not in order, I understood that myself. So they advise me, ‘Go to
this famous lawyer, he was a professor, not simply a lawyer, but a jurist,
he’ll tell you for certain what to do.’ I took my last fifteen roubles to him;
the lawyer came out, and didn’t listen to me for even three minutes: ‘I see,’
he says, ‘I know,’ he says, ‘if he wants to,’ he says, ‘the merchant will pay
you back, if he doesn’t, he won’t, but if you start a case, you may have to
pay more, best of all is to make peace.’ And he made a joke from the
Gospel: ‘Agree with thine adversary,’ he says, ‘whiles thou art in the way,

till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.’56 He sends me away, laughing.
That was the end of my fifteen roubles! I came to Olya, we sit facing each
other, I began to weep. She doesn’t weep, she sits there proud, indignant.
And she’s always been like that, all her life, even when she was little, she
never sighed, never wept, so she sits, glaring terribly, it’s even eerie to look
at her. And, would you believe it, I was afraid of her, completely afraid,
long afraid; and I’d feel like whining now and then, but I don’t dare in front
of her. I went to the merchant for a last time, wept my fill there. ‘All right,’
he says, and doesn’t even listen. Meanwhile, I must confess, since we
hadn’t counted on staying so long, we’d already been without money for
some time. I gradually began to pawn my clothes, and we lived on that. We
pawned everything we had, she began giving up her last bit of linen, and
here I started weeping bitter tears. She stamped her foot, jumped up, and
ran to the merchant herself. He’s a widower; he talked to her: ‘Come the
day after tomorrow at five o’clock,’ he said, ‘maybe I’ll tell you
something.’ She came back cheered up: ‘See,’ she says, ‘maybe he’ll tell
me something.’ Well, I was glad, too, only my heart somehow went cold in
me: what’s going to happen, I think, but I don’t dare ask her. Two days later
she came back from the merchant pale, all trembling, threw herself on the
bed—I understood everything, but I don’t dare ask. What do you think: he
gave her fifteen roubles, the robber, ‘and if I meet with full honor in you,’
he says, ‘I’ll add another forty roubles.’ That’s what he said right to her
face, shamelessly. She rushed at him then, she told me, but he pushed her
back and even locked himself away from her in another room. And
meanwhile, I confess to you in all conscience, we have almost nothing to
eat. We took and sold a jacket lined with rabbit fur, and she went to the
newspaper and advertised: preparation in all subjects, and also arithmetic.
‘They’ll pay at least thirty kopecks,’ she says. And towards the very end,
dear lady, I even began to be horrified at her: she says nothing to me, sits
for hours on end at the window, looking at the roof of the house opposite,
and suddenly shouts: ‘At least to do laundry, at least to dig the earth!’ She’d
shout just some word like that and stamp her foot. And we have no
acquaintances here, there’s nobody to go to: ‘What will become of us?’ I
think. And I keep being afraid to talk to her. Once she slept in the afternoon,
woke up, opened her eyes, looked at me; I sit on the chest, also looking at

her; she got up silently, came over to me, embraced me very, very tightly,
and then the two of us couldn’t help ourselves and wept, we sit and weep,
without letting go of each other’s arms. It was the first time like that in her
whole life. So we’re sitting like that with each other, and your Nastasya
comes in and says, ‘There’s some lady asking to see you.’ This was just
four days ago. The lady comes in. We see she’s very well dressed, speaks
Russian, but with what seems like a German accent: ‘You advertised in the
newspaper,’ she says, ‘that you give lessons?’ We were so glad then, asked
her to sit down, she laughs so sweetly: ‘It’s not me,’ she says, ‘but my niece
has small children; if you like, kindly come to see us, we’ll discuss things
there.’ She gave the address, by the Voznesensky Bridge, number such-andsuch, apartment number such-and-such. She left. Olechka set off, she went
running that same day, and what then? She came back two hours later in
hysterics, thrashing. Later she told me: ‘I asked the caretaker,’ she says,
‘where apartment number such-and-such was. The caretaker looked at me,’
she says. ‘ “And what,” he says, “do you want with that apartment?” He
said it so strangely that I might have thought better of it.’ But she was
imperious, impatient, she couldn’t stand these questions and rudeness. ‘Go,’
he says, jabbing his finger towards the stairs, turned and went back to his
lodge. And what do you think? She goes in, asks, and women come running
at once from all sides: ‘Come in, come in!’—all the women, laughing,
painted, foul, piano-playing, rush to her and pull her. ‘I tried to get out of
there,’ she says, ‘but they wouldn’t let me go.’ She got frightened, her legs
gave way under her, they don’t let her go, and then it’s all sweet talk,
coaxing her, they opened a bottle of port, give it to her, insist. She jumped
up, shouting with all her might, trembling: ‘Let me go, let me go!’ She
rushed to the door, they hold the door, she screams; then the one that had
come to us ran up to her, slapped my Olya twice in the face, and shoved her
out the door: ‘You’re not worthy, you slut,’ she says, ‘to be in a noble
house!’ And another shouts after her on the stairs: ‘You came here yourself,
since you’ve got nothing to eat, but we wouldn’t even look at such a mug!’
All that night she lay in a fever, raving, and the next morning her eyes
flashed, she’d get up and pace: ‘To court,’ she says, ‘I’ll take her to court!’ I
said nothing: well, I thought, what can you do about it in court, what can
you prove? She paces, she wrings her hands, her tears pour down, her lips
are pressed together, unmoving. And since that same time, her whole face

turned dark till the very end. On the third day she felt better, she was silent,
she seemed to have calmed down. It was then, at four o’clock in the
afternoon, that Mr. Versilov paid us a visit.
“And I’ll say it outright: I still can’t understand how Olya, mistrustful as
she was, could have begun to listen to him then almost from the first word.
What attracted us both most of all then was that he had such a serious look,
stern even, he speaks softly, thoroughly, and so politely—ever so politely,
even respectfully, and yet there’s no self-seeking to be seen in him: you see
straight off that the man has come with a pure heart. ‘I read your
advertisement in the newspaper,’ he says. ‘You didn’t write it correctly,
miss,’ he says, ‘and you may even do yourself harm by it.’ And he began to
explain, I confess I didn’t understand, there was something about
arithmetic, only I can see Olya blushed, and became as if animated, she
listens, gets into conversation so willingly (he really must be an intelligent
man!), I hear how she even thanks him. He asked her about everything so
thoroughly, and you could see he’d lived a long time in Moscow, and, it
turned out, knew the directress of her high school personally. ‘I’m sure I’ll
find lessons for you,’ he says, ‘because I have many acquaintances here and
can even appeal to many influential persons, so that if you want a
permanent position, then that, too, can be kept in view . . . and meanwhile,’
he says, ‘forgive me one direct question to you: may I not be of use to you
right now in some way? It will not be I who give you pleasure,’ he says,
‘but, on the contrary, you who give it to me, if you allow me to be of use to
you in any way at all. Let it be your debt,’ he says, ‘and once you get a
position, you can pay it back to me in the shortest time. And, believe me on
my honor, if I ever fell into such poverty afterwards, while you were
provided with everything—I’d come straight to you for a little help, I’d
send my wife and daughter . . .’ That is, I don’t remember all his words,
only at this point I shed a few tears, because I saw Olya’s lips quiver with
gratitude. ‘If I accept,’ she answers him, ‘it’s because I trust an honorable
and humane man who could be my father . . .’ She said it to him so
beautifully, briefly and nobly: ‘a humane man,’ she says. He stood up at
once: ‘I’ll find lessons and a post for you without fail, without fail,’ he says,
‘I’ll busy myself with it starting today, because you have quite enough
qualifications for that . . .’ And I forgot to say that at the very beginning,

when he came in, he looked over all her documents from high school, she
showed them to him, and he examined her in various subjects . . . ‘He
examined me in some subjects, mama,’ Olya says to me later, ‘and how
intelligent he is,’ she says, ‘it’s not every day you get to talk with such a
developed and educated man . . .’ And she’s just beaming all over. The
money, sixty roubles, is lying on the table. ‘Put it away, mama,’ she says,
‘we’ll get a post and pay it back to him first thing, we’ll prove that we’re
honest, and that we’re delicate he’s already seen.’ She fell silent then, I see,
she’s breathing so deeply: ‘You know, mama,’ she suddenly says to me, ‘if
we were coarse people, maybe we wouldn’t have accepted it out of pride,
but now that we’ve accepted it, we’ve proved our delicacy to him, showing
that we trust him in everything, as a respectable, gray-haired man, isn’t it
true?’ At first I didn’t understand right and said, ‘Why not accept the
benevolence of a noble and wealthy man, Olya, if on top of that he’s
kindhearted?’ She frowned at me: ‘No, mama,’ she says, ‘it’s not that, we
don’t need his benevolence, what’s precious is his “humaneness.” And as
for the money, it would even be better not to take it, mama. Since he’s
promised to find me a position, that would be enough . . . though we are in
need.’ ‘Well, Olya,’ I say, ‘our need is such that we simply can’t refuse’—I
even smiled. Well, in myself I’m glad, only an hour later she slipped this in
for me: ‘You wait, mama,’ she says, ‘and don’t spend the money.’ She said
it so resolutely. ‘What?’ I say. ‘Just don’t,’ she said, broke off, and fell
silent. She was silent the whole evening; only past one o’clock at night I
wake up and hear Olya tossing on her bed. ‘You’re not asleep, mama?’
‘No,’ I say, ‘I’m not.’ ‘Do you know,’ she says, ‘that he wanted to insult
me?’ ‘How can you, how can you?’ I say. ‘It has to be so; he’s a mean man,
don’t you dare spend one kopeck of his money.’ I tried to talk to her, I even
cried a little right there in bed—she turned to the wall: ‘Be quiet,’ she says,
‘let me sleep!’ The next morning I watch her, she goes about not looking
herself; and believe me or not, I’ll say it before God’s judgment seat: she
wasn’t in her right mind then! Ever since they insulted her in that mean
house, she got troubled in her heart . . . and in her mind. I look at her that
morning and I have doubts about her; I feel frightened; I won’t contradict
her, I thought, not in a single word. ‘Mama,’ she says, ‘he didn’t even leave
his address.’ ‘Shame on you, Olya,’ I say, ‘you heard him yourself
yesterday, you praised him yourself afterwards, you were about to weep

grateful tears yourself.’ As soon as I said it, she shrieked, stamped her foot:
‘You’re a woman of mean feelings,’ she says, ‘you’re of the old upbringing
on serfdom!’ . . . and despite all I said, she snatched her hat, ran out, and I
shouted after her. ‘What’s the matter with her,’ I think, ‘where has she run
to?’ And she ran to the address bureau, found out where Mr. Versilov lived,
came back. ‘Today,’ she says, ‘right now, I’ll bring him the money and fling
it in his face; he wanted to insult me,’ she says, ‘like Safronov’ (that’s our
merchant); ‘only Safronov insulted me like a crude peasant, and this one
like a cunning Jesuit.’ And here suddenly, as bad luck would have it, that
gentleman from yesterday knocked: ‘I heard you speaking about Versilov, I
can give you information.’ When she heard about Versilov, she fell on the
man, totally beside herself, she talks and talks, I look at her, wondering:
she’s so taciturn, she never speaks like that with anyone, and here it’s a
complete stranger. Her cheeks are burning, her eyes flashing . . . And he up
and says, ‘You’re perfectly right, miss,’ he says. ‘Versilov,’ he says, ‘is
exactly like these generals here, that they describe in the newspapers; the
general would deck himself out with all his medals and go calling on
governesses who advertise in the newspapers, he’d go about and find what
he wanted; and if he didn’t find what he wanted, he’d sit and talk and
promise heaps of things, and go away—even so he provides himself with
entertainment.’ Olya even burst out laughing, only so spitefully, and this
gentleman, I see, takes her hand, puts it to his heart. ‘I, too, miss,’ he says,
‘have capital of my own, and I could always offer it to a beautiful girl, but
it’s better,’ he says, ‘if I first kiss her sweet little hand . . .’ And I see him
pulling her hand to kiss it. She just jumped up, but here I jumped up with
her, and the two of us chased him out. Then, before evening, Olya snatched
the money from me, ran out, comes back: ‘Mama,’ she says, ‘I took revenge
on the dishonorable man!’ ‘Ah, Olya, Olya,’ I say, ‘maybe we’ve missed
our chance, you’ve insulted a noble, benevolent man!’ I wept from vexation
at her, I couldn’t help myself. She shouts at me: ‘I don’t want it,’ she
shouts, ‘I don’t want it! Even if he’s the most honorable man, even then I
don’t want his charity! If anybody pities me, even that I don’t want!’ I lay
down, and there was nothing in my thoughts. How many times I had looked
at that nail in your wall, left over from the mirror—it never occurred to me,
never once occurred to me, not yesterday, not before, and I never thought of
it, never dreamed of it at all, and never, ever expected it of Olya. I usually

sleep soundly, I snore, it’s the blood flowing to my head, but sometimes it
goes to my heart, I cry out in my sleep, so that Olya wakes me up in the
night: ‘You sleep so soundly, mama,’ she says, ‘it’s even impossible to
wake you up if I need to.’ ‘Oh, Olya,’ I say, ‘soundly, so soundly!’ So I
must have started snoring last night, she waited a while, and then she was
no longer afraid, and she got up. This long strap from the suitcase was there
all the time, this whole month, I was still thinking about it yesterday
morning: ‘Put it away, finally, so that it doesn’t lie about.’ And the chair she
must have pushed away with her foot, and she spread her skirt beside it so
that it wouldn’t make any noise. And I must have woken up long, long after,
a whole hour or more. ‘Olya!’ I call, ‘Olya!’ I suspected something at once.
I call her. It was either that I couldn’t hear her breathing in bed, or perhaps I
made out in the darkness that her bed was empty—only I suddenly got up
and felt with my hand: there was no one in the bed, and the pillow was cold.
My heart just sank, I stand where I am as if senseless, my mind goes dim.
‘She went out,’ I thought—took a step, and I see her there by the bed, in the
corner, near the door, as if she’s standing there herself. I stand, silent, look
at her, and she also seems to be looking at me out of the darkness, without
stirring . . . ‘Only why,’ I think, ‘did she get up on a chair?’ ‘Olya,’ I
whisper, getting scared, ‘Olya, do you hear?’ Only suddenly it was as if it
all dawned on me, I took a step, thrust both arms out, straight at her, put
them around her, and she sways in my arms, I clutch her, and she sways, I
understand everything, and I don’t want to understand . . . I want to cry out,
but no cry comes . . . ‘Ah!’ I think. I dropped to the floor, and then I cried
out . . .”
“Vasin,” I said in the morning, already past five o’clock, “if it hadn’t
been for your Stebelkov, maybe this woudn’t have happened.”
“Who knows, it probably would. It’s impossible to judge like that here, it
was all prepared for even without that . . . True, this Stebelkov sometimes . .
.”
He didn’t finish and winced very unpleasantly. Before seven he went out
again; he kept bustling about. I was finally left completely alone. Dawn had
broken. My head was spinning slightly. I kept imagining Versilov; this

lady’s story presented him in a totally different light. To think it over more
comfortably, I lay down on Vasin’s bed, as I was, dressed and with my
boots on, for a moment, with no intention of sleeping—and suddenly fell
asleep. I don’t even remember how it happened. I slept for nearly four
hours; nobody woke me up.

Chapter Ten
I
I WOKE UP at around half-past ten and for a long time could not believe
my eyes: on the sofa where I had slept the night before sat my mother, and
beside her—the unfortunate neighbor, the mother of the suicide. They were
holding each other’s hands, speaking in whispers, probably so as not to
wake me up, and both were weeping. I got out of bed and rushed straight to
kiss mama. She beamed all over, kissed me, and crossed me three times
with her right hand. We had no time to say a word: the door opened, and
Versilov and Vasin came in. Mama stood up at once and took the neighbor
with her. Vasin gave me his hand, but Versilov didn’t say a word to me and
lowered himself into an armchair. He and mama had evidently been there
for some time. His face was somber and preoccupied.
“I regret most of all,” he began saying measuredly to Vasin, obviously
continuing a conversation already begun, “that I didn’t manage to settle it
last evening, and—surely this dreadful thing wouldn’t have come about!
And there was time enough: it wasn’t eight o’clock yet. As soon as she ran
away from us last night, I at once resolved mentally to follow her here and
reassure her, but this unforeseen and urgent matter, which, however, I could
very well have put off until today . . . or even for a week—this vexatious
matter hindered and ruined everything. That things should come together
like that!”
“But maybe you wouldn’t have managed to reassure her; even without
you, it seems a lot was seething and smoldering there,” Vasin remarked in
passing.
“No, I’d have managed, I’d surely have managed. And the thought
occurred to me of sending Sofya Andreevna in my place. It flashed, but
only flashed. Sofya Andreevna alone would have won her over, and the

unfortunate girl would have remained alive. No, never again will I meddle .
. . with ‘good deeds’ . . . Just once in my life I tried meddling! And here I’m
thinking that I haven’t lagged behind your generation and understand
contemporary youth. Yes, our old folk grow old almost before they mature.
Incidentally, there are actually an awful lot of people nowadays who, out of
habit, still consider themselves the younger generation, because yesterday
they still were, and they don’t notice that they’re already verbannte.” 30
“A misunderstanding occurred here, all too clear a misunderstanding,”
Vasin observed sensibly. “Her mother says that after the cruel insult in the
public house, it was as if she lost her mind. Add to that the surroundings,
the original insult from the merchant . . . all this could have happened in the
same way in former times, and I don’t think it’s in any way especially
characteristic of present-day youth.”
“They’re a bit impatient, these present-day youth, and besides, naturally,
there’s little understanding of actualities, which, though it’s characteristic of
any youth at any time, is somehow especially so of our youth . . . Tell me,
and what mischief did Mr. Stebelkov do here?”
“Mr. Stebelkov,” I suddenly cut in, “is the cause of it all. If it hadn’t been
for him, nothing would have happened; he poured oil on the fire.”
Versilov listened, but he didn’t look at me. Vasin frowned.
“I also reproach myself for one ridiculous circumstance,” Versilov went
on unhurriedly and drawing the words out as before. “It seems that I, as is
my nasty habit, allowed myself a certain sort of merriment then, this lightminded little laugh—in short, I was insufficiently sharp, dry, and gloomy,
three qualities that seem to be of great value among the contemporary
younger generation . . . In short, I gave her reasons to take me for a
wandering Céladon.”57 “Quite the contrary,” I again cut in abruptly, “her
mother affirms in particular that you made an excellent impression precisely
by your seriousness, sternness even, sincerity—her own words. The
deceased girl praised you for it after you left.”

“D-did she?” Versilov mumbled, giving me a fleeting glance at last.
“Take this scrap of paper, it’s necessary to the case”—he handed a tiny bit
of paper to Vasin. The latter took it and, seeing that I was looking with
curiosity, gave it to me to read. It was a note, two uneven lines scrawled
with a pencil and maybe in the dark.
“Mama dear, forgive me for having stopped my life’s debut. Your
distressing Olya.”
“It was found only in the morning,” Vasin explained.
“What a strange note!” I exclaimed in astonishment.
“Strange in what way?” asked Vasin.
“How can one write in humorous expressions at such a moment?”
Vasin looked at me questioningly.
“And the humor’s strange,” I went on, “the conventional high-school
language among schoolmates . . . Well, at such a moment and in such a note
to an unfortunate mother—and it turns out she did love her mother—who
could write ‘stopped my life’s debut’!”
“Why can’t one write it?” Vasin still didn’t understand.
“There’s no humor here at all,” Versilov finally observed. “The
expression is, of course, inappropriate, totally in the wrong tone, and indeed
might have come from high-school talk or some sort of conventional
language among schoolmates, as you said, or from some sort of feuilletons,
but the deceased girl used it in this terrible note quite simpleheartedly and
seriously.”
“That can’t be, she completed her studies and graduated with a silver
medal.”

“A silver medal means nothing here. Nowadays there are many who
complete their studies.”
“Down on the youth again,” Vasin smiled.
“Not in the least,” Versilov replied, getting up from his place and taking
his hat. “If the present generation is not so literary, then it undoubtedly
possesses . . . other virtues,” he added with extraordinary seriousness.
“Besides, ‘many’ is not ‘all,’ and I don’t accuse you, for instance, of poor
literary development, and you’re also still a young man.”
“Yes, and Vasin didn’t find anything wrong in ‘debut ’!” I couldn’t help
observing.
Versilov silently gave Vasin his hand; the latter also seized his cap to go
out with him, and shouted good-bye to me. Versilov left without noticing
me. I also had no time to lose: I had at all costs to run and look for an
apartment—now I needed it more than ever! Mama was no longer with the
landlady, she had left and taken the neighbor with her. I went outside
feeling somehow especially cheerful . . . Some new and big feeling was
being born in my soul. Besides, as if on purpose, everything seemed to
contribute: I ran into an opportunity remarkably quickly and found a quite
suitable apartment; of this apartment later, but now I’ll finish about the
main thing.
It was just getting past one o’clock when I went back to Vasin’s again for
my suitcase and happened to find him at home again. Seeing me, he
exclaimed with a merry and sincere air:
“How glad I am that you found me, I was just about to leave! I can tell
you a fact that I believe will interest you very much.”
“I’m convinced beforehand!” I cried.
“Hah, how cheerful you look! Tell me, did you know anything about a
certain letter that had been kept by Kraft and that Versilov got hold of
yesterday, precisely something to do with the inheritance he won? In this

letter the testator clarifies his will in a sense opposite to yesterday’s court
decision. The letter was written long ago. In short, I don’t know precisely
what exactly, but don’t you know something?”
“How could I not? Two days ago Kraft took me to his place just for that .
. . from those gentlemen, in order to give me that letter, and yesterday I
gave it to Versilov.”
“Did you? That’s what I thought. Then imagine, the business Versilov
mentioned here today—which kept him from coming last evening and
persuading that girl—this business came about precisely because of that
letter. Last evening Versilov went straight to Prince Sokolsky’s lawyer, gave
him the letter, and renounced the entire inheritance he had won. At the
present moment this renunciation has already been put in legal form.
Versilov isn’t giving it to them, but in this act he recognizes the full right of
the princes.”
I was dumbstruck, but delighted. In reality I had been completely
convinced that Versilov would destroy the letter. Moreover, though I did
talk with Kraft about how it would not be noble, and though I had repeated
it to myself in the tavern, and that “I had come to a pure man, not to this
one”—still deeper within myself, that is, in my innermost soul, I considered
that it was even impossible to act otherwise than to cross out the document
completely. That is, I considered it a most ordinary matter. If I were to
blame Versilov later, I’d do it only on purpose, for appearances, that is, to
retain my superior position over him. But, hearing about Versilov’s great
deed now, I was sincerely delighted, fully so, condemning with repentance
and shame my cynicism and my indifference to virtue, and that instant,
having exalted Versilov infinitely above me, I nearly embraced Vasin.
“What a man! What a man! Who else would have done that?” I
exclaimed in ecstasy.
“I agree with you that a great many would not have done it . . . and that,
indisputably, the act is highly disinterested . . .”
“‘But ’? . . . finish what you’re saying, Vasin, you have a ‘but’?”

“Yes, of course there’s a ‘but.’ Versilov’s act, in my opinion, is a little bit
hasty and a little bit not so straightforward,” Vasin smiled.
“Not straightforward?”
“Yes. There’s something like a ‘pedestal’ here. Because in any case he
could have done the same thing without hurting himself. If not half, then
still, undoubtedly, a certain portion of the inheritance could go to Versilov
now, too, even taking the most ticklish view of the matter, the more so as
the document did not have decisive significance, and he had already won
the case. That is the opinion held by the lawyer of the opposite side; I’ve
just spoken with him. The act would remain no less handsome, but owing
solely to a whim of pride it has happened otherwise. Above all, Mr.
Versilov became overexcited and—needlessly over-hasty. He said himself
today that he could have put it off for a whole week . . .”
“You know what, Vasin? I can’t help agreeing with you, but . . . I like it
better this way! It pleases me better this way!”
“Anyhow, it’s a matter of taste. You challenged me yourself; I would
have kept silent.”
“Even if there is a ‘pedestal’ here, that’s all the better,” I went on. “A
pedestal’s a pedestal, but in itself it’s a very valuable thing. This ‘pedestal’
is the same old ‘ideal,’ and it’s hardly better that it’s missing from some
present-day souls. Let it be, even with a slight deformity! And surely you
think so yourself, Vasin, my dear heart Vasin, my darling Vasin! In short,
I’ve talked my head off, of course, but you do understand me. That’s what
makes you Vasin; and in any case I embrace you and kiss you, Vasin!”
“With joy?”
“With great joy! For this man ‘was dead and is alive again, was lost and
is found!’58 Vasin, I’m a trashy little brat and not worthy of you. I confess it
precisely because there are some moments when I’m quite different, higher
and deeper. Two days ago I praised you to your face (and praised you only
because you had humiliated and crushed me), and for that I’ve hated you

for two whole days! I promised myself that very night that I would never go
to you, and I came to you yesterday morning only from spite, do you
understand: from spite. I sat here on a chair alone and criticized your room,
and you, and each of your books, and your landlady, trying to humiliate you
and laugh at you . . .”
“You shouldn’t be saying this . . .”
“Yesterday evening, concluding from one of your phrases that you didn’t
understand women, I was glad to have been able to catch you in that.
Earlier today, catching you on the ‘debut,’ I was again terribly glad, and all
because I myself had praised you the other time . . .”
“Why, how could it be otherwise!” Vasin finally cried (he still went on
smiling, not surprised at me in the least). “No, that’s how it always happens,
with almost everybody, and even first thing; only nobody admits it, and
there’s no need to, because in any case it will pass and nothing will come of
it.”
“Can it be the same with everybody? Everybody’s like that? And you say
it calmly? No, it’s impossible to live with such views!”
“And in your opinion:
Dearer to me than a thousand truths
Is the falsehood that exalts?”59
“But that’s right!” I cried. “Those two lines are a sacred axiom!”
“I don’t know; I wouldn’t venture to decide whether those two lines are
right or not. It must be that the truth, as always, lies somewhere in between;
that is, in one case it’s a sacred truth, in another it’s a lie. I only know one
thing for certain: that this thought will remain for a long time one of the
chief points of dispute among people. In any case, I notice that you now
want to dance. So, dance then: exercise is good for you, and I’ve had an
awful lot of work piled on me all at once this morning . . . and I’m late
because of you!”

“I’m going, I’m going, I’m off! Only one word,” I cried, seizing my
suitcase. “If I just ‘threw myself on your neck’ again, it’s solely because
when I came in, you told me about this fact with such genuine pleasure and
‘were glad’ that I came in time to find you here, and that after yesterday’s
‘debut’; by that genuine pleasure you all at once turned my ‘young heart’ in
your favor again. Well, good-bye, good-bye, I’ll try to stay away for as long
as possible, and I know that will be extremely agreeable to you, as I see
even by your eyes, and it will even be profitable for both of us . . .”
Babbling like this and nearly spluttering from my joyful babble, I
dragged my suitcase out and went with it to my apartment. I was, above all,
terribly pleased that Versilov had been so unquestionably angry with me
earlier, had not wanted to speak or look. Having transported my suitcase, I
immediately flew to my old prince. I confess, it had even been somewhat
hard for me those two days without him. And he had surely already heard
about Versilov.

II
I JUST KNEW he’d be terribly glad to see me, and I swear I’d have called
on him today even without Versilov. I was only frightened, yesterday and
today, at the thought that I might somehow meet Katerina Nikolaevna; but
now I no longer feared anything.
He embraced me joyfully.
“And Versilov? Have you heard?” I began straight off with the main
thing.
“Cher enfant, my dear friend, it’s so sublime, it’s so noble—in short,
even Kilyan” (that clerk downstairs) “was tremendously impressed! It’s not
sensible on his part, but it’s brilliant, it’s a great deed! We must value the
ideal!”
“Isn’t it true? Isn’t it true? You and I always agreed about that.”

“My dear, you and I have always agreed. Where have you been? I
absolutely wanted to go to you myself, but I didn’t know where to find you
. . . Because all the same I couldn’t go to Versilov . . . Though now, after all
this . . . You know, my friend, it was with this, it seems, that he used to win
women over, with these features, there’s no doubt of it . . .”
“By the way, before I forget, I’ve saved this precisely for you. Yesterday
one most unworthy buffoon, denouncing Versilov to my face, said of him
that he’s a ‘women’s prophet’; what an expression, eh? the expression
itself? I saved it for you . . .”
“A ‘women’s prophet’! Mais . . . c’est charmant! 31 Ha, ha! But it suits
him so well, that is, it doesn’t suit him at all—pah! . . . But it’s so apt . . .
that is, it’s not apt at all, but . . .”
“Never mind, never mind, don’t be embarrassed, look at it just as a bon
mot!”
“A splendid bon mot, and, you know, it has a most profound meaning . . .
a perfectly right idea! That is, would you believe . . . In short, I’ll tell you a
tiny secret. Did you notice that Olympiada? Would you believe it, her heart
aches a little for Andrei Petrovich, and to the point that she even seems to
be nurturing some . . .”
“Nurturing! How would she like this?” I cried out, making a fig60 in my
indignation.
“Mon cher, don’t shout, it’s just so, and perhaps you’re right from your
point of view. By the way, my friend, what was it that happened to you last
time in front of Katerina Nikolaevna? You were reeling . . . I thought you
were going to fall down and was about to rush to support you.”
“Of that some other time. Well, in short, I simply got embarrassed for a
certain reason . . .”
“You’re blushing even now.”

“Well, and you have to go smearing it around at once. You know there’s
hostility between her and Versilov . . . well, and all that, well, and so I got
excited: eh, let’s drop it, another time!”
“Let’s drop it, let’s drop it, I’m glad to drop it myself . . . In short, I’m
extremely guilty before her, and, remember, I even murmured in front of
you then . . . Forget it, my friend; she’ll also change her opinion of you, I
have a real presentiment . . . But here’s Prince Seryozha!”
A young and handsome officer came in. I looked at him greedily, I had
never seen him before. That is, I say handsome, just as everybody said it of
him, yet there was something in that young and handsome face that was not
entirely attractive. I precisely note this as the impression of the very first
moment, of my first glance at him, which remained in me ever after. He was
lean, of a fine height, dark blond, with a fresh face, though slightly
yellowish, and with a resolute gaze. His fine dark eyes had a somewhat
stern look, even when he was quite calm. But his resolute gaze precisely
repelled one, because one felt for some reason that this resoluteness cost
him all too little. However, I don’t know how to put it . . . Of course, his
face was able to turn suddenly from a stern to a surprisingly gentle, meek,
and tender expression, the transformation being, above all, unquestionably
simplehearted. And this simpleheartedness was attractive. I’ll note another
feature: despite the gentleness and simpleheartedness, this face never
showed mirth; even when the prince laughed with all his heart, you still felt
as if there was never any genuine, bright, easy mirth in his heart . . .
However, it’s extremely hard to describe a face like his. I’m quite incapable
of it. The old prince straightaway rushed to introduce us, as was his stupid
habit.
“This is my young friend, Arkady Andreevich Dolgoruky” (again that
“Andreevich”!).
The young prince turned to me at once with a doubly polite expression on
his face, but it was clear that my name was totally unknown to him.

“He’s . . . a relation of Andrei Petrovich,” my vexatious prince
murmured. (How vexatious these little old men sometimes are with their
habits!) The young prince caught on at once.
“Ah! I heard so long ago . . .” he said quickly. “I had the great pleasure of
making the acquaintance of your sister, Lizaveta Makarovna, last year in
Luga . . . She also spoke to me about you . . .”
I was even surprised: a decidedly sincere pleasure shone in his face.
“Excuse me, Prince,” I babbled, putting both hands behind my back, “I
must tell you sincerely—and I’m glad to be speaking before our dear prince
—that I even wished to meet you, and wished it still recently, only
yesterday, but with an entirely different intent. I say it directly, however
surprised you may be. In short, I wanted to challenge you for insulting
Versilov a year and a half ago in Ems. And though you, of course, might not
accept my challenge, because I’m only a high-school boy and an underage
adolescent, nevertheless, I would make the challenge anyway, however you
might take it and whatever you might do . . . and, I confess, I’m still of the
same intent.”
The old prince told me afterwards that I had managed to say it extremely
nobly.
Sincere grief showed in the prince’s face.
“Only you didn’t let me finish,” he replied imposingly. “If I turned to you
with words that came from the bottom of my heart, the reason was precisely
my present genuine feelings for Andrei Petrovich. I’m sorry that I cannot
tell you all the circumstances right now, but I assure you on my honor that
for a long, long time I have looked upon my unfortunate act in Ems with the
deepest regret. As I was preparing to come to Petersburg, I decided to give
Andrei Petrovich all possible satisfaction, that is, directly, literally, to ask
his forgiveness, in whatever form he indicated. The loftiest and most
powerful influences were the cause of the change in my view. The fact that
we had a lawsuit would not have influenced my decision in the least. His
action towards me yesterday shook my soul, so to speak, and even at this

moment, believe me, it’s as if I still haven’t come back to myself. And now
I must tell you—I precisely came to the prince in order to tell him about an
extraordinary circumstance: three hours ago, that is, exactly at the time
when he and his lawyer were putting together this act, a representative of
Andrei Petrovich’s came to bring me a challenge from him . . . a formal
challenge on account of the incident in Ems . . .”
“He challenged you?” I cried, and felt my eyes begin to glow and the
blood rush to my face.
“Yes, he did. I accepted the challenge at once, but I decided that before
our encounter I would send him a letter in which I would explain my view
of my act, and all my regret for this terrible mistake . . . because it was only
a mistake—an unfortunate, fatal mistake! I’ll note that my position in the
regiment made this risky; for such a letter before an encounter, I’d be
subjecting myself to public opinion . . . you understand? But in spite even
of that, I resolved on it, only I had no time to send the letter, because an
hour after the challenge, I again received a note from him in which he asked
me to forgive him for having troubled me and to forget the challenge,
adding that he regretted this ‘momentary impulse of pusillanimity and
egoism’—his own words. So he has now made the step with the letter quite
easy for me. I haven’t sent it yet, but I precisely came to tell the prince a
word or two about it . . . And believe me, I myself have suffered from the
reproaches of my conscience far more, maybe, than anybody else . . . Is this
explanation sufficient for you, Arkady Makarovich, at least now, for the
time being? Will you do me the honor of believing fully in my sincerity?”
I was completely won over. I saw an unquestionable straightforwardness,
which for me was highly unexpected. Nor had I expected anything like it. I
murmured something in reply and held out both hands to him; he joyfully
shook them in his. Then he took the prince away and talked with him for
about five minutes in his bedroom.
“If you want to give me particular pleasure,” he addressed me loudly and
openly, as he was leaving the prince, “come with me now, and I’ll show you

the letter I’m about to send to Andrei Petrovich, along with his letter to
me.”
I agreed with extreme willingness. My prince began bustling about as he
saw me off, and also called me to his bedroom for a moment.
“Mon ami, how glad I am, how glad . . . We’ll talk about it all later. By
the way, I have two letters here in my portfolio: one needs to be delivered
and explained personally, the other is to the bank—and there, too . . .”
And here he charged me with two supposedly urgent errands, which
supposedly called for extraordinary effort and attention. I had to go and
actually deliver them, sign, and so on.
“Ah, you sly fox!” I cried, taking the letters. “I swear it’s all nonsense,
and there’s nothing to it, but you invented these two errands to convince me
that I’m working and not taking money for nothing!”
“Mon enfant, I swear to you, you’re mistaken about that: these are two
most urgent matters . . . Cher enfant! ” he cried suddenly, waxing terribly
emotional, “my dear youth!” (He placed both hands on my head.) “I bless
you and your destiny . . . let us always be pure in heart, like today . . . kind
and beautiful, as far as possible . . . let us love all that’s beautiful . . . in all
its various forms . . . Well, enfin . . . enfin rendons grâce . . . et je te bénis!”
32

He didn’t finish and began whimpering over my head. I confess, I almost
wept, too; at least I embraced my old eccentric sincerely and with pleasure.
We kissed warmly.

III
PRINCE SERYOZHA (that is, Prince Sergei Petrovich, and so I shall call
him) brought me to his apartment in a jaunty droshky, and, first thing, I was
surprised at the magnificence of his apartment. That is, not really
magnificence, but this was an apartment such as the most “respectable
people” have, with high, big, bright rooms (I saw two, the others were shut

up), and the furniture once again was not God knows what Versailles or
Renaissance, but soft, comfortable, abundant, in grand style; rugs, carved
wood, figurines. Yet everyone said they were destitute, that they had
precisely nothing. I had heard in passing, though, that this prince raised dust
wherever he could, here, and in Moscow, and in his former regiment, and in
Paris, that he even gambled and had debts. The frock coat I had on was
wrinkled and moreover covered with down, because I had slept without
undressing, and my shirt was going on its fourth day. However, my frock
coat was still not totally bad, but, finding myself at the prince’s, I
remembered Versilov’s offer to have clothes made for me.
“Imagine, on the occasion of a certain suicide, I slept in my clothes all
night,” I remarked with an absentminded air, and since he paid attention at
once, I briefly told him about it. But he was obviously occupied most of all
with his letter. Above all, I found it strange that he not only had not smiled,
but had not shown the smallest reaction in that sense, when I had told him
directly earlier that I wanted to challenge him to a duel. Though I should
have been able to prevent him from laughing, still it was strange from a
man of his sort. We sat down facing each other in the middle of the room, at
his enormous writing table, and he gave me an already finished fair copy of
his letter to Versilov to read through. This document was very much like all
he had told me earlier at my prince’s; it was even ardently written. True, I
didn’t know yet how I should finally take this apparent straightforwardness
and readiness for everything good, but I was already beginning to yield to
it, because, in fact, why shouldn’t I have believed it? Whatever sort of man
he was and whatever people told about him, he still could have good
inclinations. I also looked through the last little seven-line note from
Versilov—renouncing his challenge. Though he actually wrote about his
“pusillanimity” and “egoism” in it, the note as a whole was as if
distinguished by a certain arrogance . . . or, better, this whole action showed
a sort of disdain. However, I didn’t say so out loud.
“You, though, how do you look at this renunciation?” I asked. “You don’t
think he turned coward?”

“Of course not,” the prince smiled, but with a somehow very serious
smile, and generally he was becoming more and more preoccupied. “I know
all too well that he’s a courageous man. Here, of course, there’s a special
view . . . his own disposition of ideas . . .”
“Undoubtedly,” I interrupted warmly. “A certain Vasin says that his
action with this letter and the renouncing of the inheritance are a ‘pedestal’ .
. . In my opinion, such things aren’t done for show, but correspond to
something basic, inner.”
“I know Mr. Vasin very well,” remarked the prince.
“Ah, yes, you must have seen him in Luga.”
We suddenly looked at each other and, I remember, it seems I blushed a
little. In any case he broke off the conversation. I, however, wanted very
much to talk. The thought of one meeting yesterday tempted me to ask him
some questions, only I didn’t know how to approach it. And in general I
was somehow quite out of sorts. I was also struck by his astonishing
courtesy, politeness, ease of manner—in short, all that polish of their tone,
which they assume almost from the cradle. In his letter I found two gross
errors in grammar. And generally, in such encounters, I never belittle
myself, but become more curt, which sometimes may be bad. But in the
present case it was especially aggravated by the thought that I was covered
with down, so that several times I even blundered into familiarity . . . I
noticed on the sly that the prince occasionally studied me very intently.
“Tell me, Prince,” I suddenly popped out with a question, “don’t you find
it ridiculous within yourself that I, who am still such a ‘milksop,’ wanted to
challenge you to a duel, and for somebody else’s offense at that?”
“One can be very offended by an offense to one’s father. No, I don’t find
it ridiculous.”
“And to me it seems terribly ridiculous . . . in someone else’s eyes . . .
that is, of course, not in my own. The more so as I’m Dolgoruky and not
Versilov. And if you’re not telling me the truth or are softening it somehow

from the decency of social polish, then does it mean you’re also deceiving
me in everything else?”
“No, I don’t find it ridiculous,” he replied terribly seriously. “How can
you not feel your father’s blood in you? . . . True, you’re still young,
because . . . I don’t know . . . it seems someone who is not of age cannot
fight a duel, and his challenge cannot be accepted . . . according to the rules
. . . But, if you like, there can be only one serious objection here: if you
make a challenge without the knowledge of the offended person, for whose
offense you are making the challenge, you are thereby expressing, as it
were, a certain lack of respect for him on your own part, isn’t that true?”
Our conversation was suddenly interrupted by a footman, who came to
announce something. Seeing him, the prince, who seemed to have been
expecting him, stood up without finishing what he was saying and quickly
went over to him, so that the footman made his announcement in a low
voice, and I, of course, didn’t hear what it was.
“Excuse me,” the prince turned to me, “I’ll be back in a minute.”
And he went out. I was left alone; I paced the room and thought.
Strangely, I both liked him and terribly disliked him. There was something
in him that I could not name myself, but something repellent. “If he’s not
laughing at me a bit, then without doubt he’s terribly straightforward, but if
he was laughing at me . . . then maybe he’d seem more intelligent . . .” I
thought somehow strangely. I went over to the table and read Versilov’s
letter once more. I was so absorbed that I even forgot about the time, and
when I came to my senses, I suddenly noticed that the prince’s little minute
had indisputably lasted a whole quarter of an hour already. That began to
trouble me a little; I paced up and down once more, finally took my hat and,
I remember, decided to step out so as to meet someone, to send for the
prince, and, when he came, to take leave of him at once, assuring him that I
had things to do and could not wait any longer. It seemed to me that this
would be most proper, because I was slightly pained by the thought that, in
leaving me for so long, he was treating me negligently.

The two closed doors to this room were at two ends of the same wall.
Having forgotten which door we came in by, or, rather, out of
absentmindedness, I opened one of them and suddenly saw, sitting on a sofa
in a long and narrow room—my sister Liza. There was no one there except
her, and she was, of course, waiting for someone. But before I had time
even to be surprised, I suddenly heard the voice of the prince, talking loudly
to someone and going back to his study. I quickly closed the door, and the
prince, coming in through the other door, noticed nothing. I remember he
started apologizing and said something about some Anna Fyodorovna . . .
But I was so confused and astounded that I made out almost none of it, and
only muttered that I had to go home, and then insistently and quickly left.
The well-bred prince, of course, must have looked at my manners with
curiosity. He saw me off to the front hall and kept talking, but I did not
reply and did not look at him.

IV
GOING OUTSIDE, I turned left and started walking at random. Nothing
added up in my head. I walked slowly and, it seems, had gone quite far,
some five hundred steps, when I suddenly felt a light tap on my shoulder. I
turned and saw Liza: she had caught up with me and tapped me lightly with
her umbrella. There was something terribly gay and a bit sly in her shining
eyes.
“Well, how glad I am that you went this way, otherwise I wouldn’t have
met you today!” She was slightly breathless from walking quickly.
“How breathless you are.”
“I ran terribly to catch up with you.”
“Liza, was it you I just met?”
“Where?”
“At the prince’s . . . Prince Sokolsky’s . . .”

“No, not me, you didn’t meet me . . .”
I said nothing, and we walked on some ten paces. Liza burst into loud
laughter:
“Me, me, of course it was me! Listen, you saw me yourself, you looked
into my eyes, and I looked into your eyes, so how can you ask whether you
met me? Well, what a character! And you know, I wanted terribly to laugh
when you stared into my eyes there, it was terribly funny the way you
stared.”
She laughed terribly. I felt all the anguish leave my heart at once.
“But, tell me, how did you wind up there?”
“I was at Anna Fyodorovna’s.”
“What Anna Fyodorovna?”
“Stolbeev. When we lived in Luga, I sat with her for whole days; she
received mama at her place and even called on us. And she called on almost
nobody there. She’s a distant relation of Andrei Petrovich’s and a relation of
the Princes Sokolsky; she’s some sort of grandmother to the prince.”
“So she lives with the prince?”
“No, the prince lives with her.”
“So whose apartment is it?”
“It’s her apartment, the apartment has been all hers for a whole year now.
The prince has just arrived and is staying with her. And she herself has only
been four days in Petersburg.”
“ Well . . . you know what, Liza, God be with the apartment, and the
woman herself . . .”
“No, she’s wonderful . . .”

“Let her be, and in spades. We’re wonderful ourselves! Look, what a day,
look, how good! How beautiful you are today, Liza. However, you’re a
terrible child.”
“Arkady, tell me, that girl, the one yesterday.”
“Ah, what a pity, Liza, what a pity!”
“Ah, what a pity! What a fate! You know, it’s even sinful that you and I
go along so merrily, and her soul is now flying somewhere in the darkness,
in some bottomless darkness, sinner that she is, and offended . . . Arkady,
who’s to blame for her sin? Ah, how frightful it is! Do you ever think about
that darkness? Ah, how afraid I am of death, and how sinful that is! I don’t
like the dark, I much prefer this sun! Mama says it’s sinful to be afraid . . .
Arkady, do you know mama well?”
“Little so far, Liza, I know her very little.”
“Ah, what a being she is; you must, must get to know her! She has to be
understood in a special way . . .”
“But see, I didn’t know you either, and now I know the whole of you. I
came to know the whole of you in one minute. Though you’re afraid of
death, Liza, it must be that you’re proud, bold, courageous. Better than I,
much better than I! I love you terribly, Liza! Ah, Liza! Let death come
when it must, and meanwhile—live, live! We’ll pity that unfortunate girl,
but even so we’ll bless life, right? Right? I have an ‘idea,’ Liza. Liza, do
you know that Versilov renounced the inheritance?”
“How could I not know! Mama and I already kissed each other.”
“You don’t know my soul, Liza, you don’t know what this man has
meant for me . . .”
“Well, how could I not know, I know everything.”

“You know everything? Well, what else! You’re intelligent; you’re more
intelligent than Vasin. You and mama—you have penetrating, humane eyes,
that is, looks, not eyes, I’m wrong . . . I’m bad in many ways, Liza.”
“You need to be taken in hand, that’s all.”
“Take me, Liza. How nice it is to look at you today. Do you know that
you’re very pretty? I’ve never seen your eyes before . . . Only now I’ve
seen them for the first time . . . Where did you get them today, Liza? Where
did you buy them? How much did you pay? Liza, I’ve never had a friend,
and I look upon the idea as nonsense; but with you it’s not nonsense . . . If
you want, let’s be friends! You understand what I want to say? . . .”
“I understand very well.”
“And you know, without any conditions, any contract—we’ll simply be
friends!”
“Yes, simply, simply, only with one condition: if we ever accuse each
other, if we’re displeased with something, if we ourselves become wicked,
bad, if we even forget all this—let’s never forget this day and this very
hour! Let’s promise ourselves. Let’s promise that we will always remember
this day, when we walked hand in hand, and laughed so, and were so merry
. . . Yes? Yes?”
“Yes, Liza, yes, and I swear it; but, Liza, it’s as if I’m hearing you for the
first time . . . Liza, have you read a lot?”
“He never asked till now! Only yesterday, when I made a slip in
speaking, he deigned to pay attention for the first time, my dear sir, Mister
Wise Man.”
“But why didn’t you start talking to me yourself, since I was such a
fool?”
“I kept waiting for you to become smarter. I saw through you from the
very beginning, Arkady Makarovich, and once I saw through you, I began

to think like this: ‘He’ll come, he’ll surely end up by coming’—well, and I
supposed it was better to leave that honor to you, so that it was you who
made the first step: ‘No,’ I thought, ‘now you run after me a little!’”
“Ah, you little coquette! Well, Liza, confess outright: have you been
laughing at me all this month or not?”
“Oh, you’re very funny, you’re terribly funny, Arkady! And you know, it
may be that I loved you most of all this month because you’re such an odd
duck. But in many ways you’re also a silly duck—that’s so you don’t get
too proud. Do you know who else laughed at you? Mama laughed at you,
mama and I together: ‘What an odd duck,’ we’d whisper, ‘really, what an
odd duck!’ And you sat there and thought all the while that we’re sitting
there and trembling before you.”
“Liza, what do you think of Versilov?”
“I think a great many things about him; but you know, we’re not going to
talk about him now. There’s no need to talk about him today, right?”
“Perfectly right! No, you’re terribly intelligent, Liza! You’re certainly
more intelligent than I am. You just wait, Liza, I’ll finish with all this, and
then maybe I’ll tell you something . . .”
“Why are you frowning?”
“I’m not frowning, Liza, I’m just . . . You see, Liza, it’s better to be
direct: I have this feature, I don’t like it when someone puts a finger on
certain ticklish things in my soul . . . or, better to say, if you keep letting out
certain feelings for everybody to admire, it’s shameful, isn’t it? And so I
sometimes prefer to frown and say nothing. You’re intelligent, you must
understand.”
“Not only that, I’m the same way myself; I understand you in everything.
Do you know that mama is the same way, too?”

“Ah, Liza! If only we could live longer in this world! Eh? What did you
say?”
“No, I didn’t say anything.”
“You’re just looking?”
“Yes, and you’re looking, too. I look at you and love you.”
I took her almost all the way home and gave her my address. Saying
good-bye, I kissed her for the first time in my life . . .

V
AND ALL THAT would have been fine, but there was one thing that wasn’t
fine: one oppressive idea had been throbbing in me since nightfall and
would not leave my mind. This was that when I had met that unfortunate
girl by the gate last evening, I had told her that I myself was leaving my
home, my nest, that one could leave wicked people and start one’s own
nest, and that Versilov had many illegitimate children. These words about a
father from a son had most certainly confirmed in her all her suspicions
about Versilov and about his having insulted her. I had accused Stebelkov,
but maybe it was I myself, above all, who had poured oil on the fire. This
thought was terrible, it’s terrible even now . . . But then, that morning,
though I was already beginning to suffer, it had still seemed nonsense to
me: “Eh, even without me, a lot was ‘seething and smoldering’ there,” I
repeated at times. “Eh, never mind, it’ll pass! I’ll come right! I’ll make up
for it . . . by some good deed . . . I’ve still got fifty years ahead of me!”
But the idea still throbbed.

PART TWO

Chapter One
I
I FLY OVER a space of nearly two months; let the reader not worry:
everything will be clear from the further account. I sharply mark off the day
of the fifteenth of November—a day all too memorable to me for many
reasons. And first of all, nobody would have recognized me who had seen
me two months earlier, at least externally; that is, they’d have recognized
me, but wouldn’t have known what to make of it. I’m dressed like a fop—
that’s the first thing. That “conscientious Frenchman and with taste,” whom
Versilov once wanted to recommend me to, had not only already made all
my clothes, but had already been rejected by me: other tailors stitch for me,
higher class, the foremost, and I even have an account with them. I also
have an account in a certain famous restaurant, but here I’m still afraid, and
the moment I have money I pay it at once, though I know it’s mauvais ton33
and that I compromise myself by it. A French barber on Nevsky Prospect is
on familiar terms with me, and when he does my hair, he tells me
anecdotes. I confess, I practice my French with him. Though I know the
language, and even quite decently, I’m still somehow afraid to start
speaking it in grand society; besides, my pronunciation must be far from
Parisian. I have Matvei, a coachman with a trotter, and he appears to serve
me when I send for him. He has a light bay stallion (I don’t like grays).
There are, however, also some irregularities: it’s the fifteenth of November,
and the third day since winter settled in, but my fur coat is old, a raccoon
from Versilov’s shoulders, worth twenty-five roubles if I were to sell it. I
must buy a new one, but my pockets are empty, and besides, I must provide
myself with money for this evening, and that at all costs—otherwise I’m
“wretched and forlorn,” those were my own utterances at the time. Oh,
meanness! What then, where have they suddenly come from, these
thousands, these trotters, and les Borel?1 How could I so suddenly forget
everything and change so much? Disgrace! Reader, I am now beginning the

history of my shame and disgrace, and nothing in life can be more shameful
for me than these memories!
I speak thus as a judge, and I know that I’m guilty. In that whirl in which
I then spun, though I was alone, without guide or counselor, I swear, I was
already aware of my fall, and therefore had no excuse. And yet all those
two months I was almost happy—why almost? I was only too happy! And
even to the point that the consciousness of disgrace, flashing at moments
(frequent moments!), which made my soul shudder—that very awareness—
will anyone believe me?—intoxicated me still more: “And so what, if I fall,
I fall; but I won’t fall, I’ll get out! I have my star!” I was walking on a
slender bridge made of splinters, without railings, over an abyss, and it was
fun for me to walk like that; I even peeked into the abyss. It was risky, and
it was fun. And the “idea”? “The idea” later, the idea was waiting; all that
was going on—“was only a deviation to the side”: “why not amuse myself
?” The bad thing about “my idea,” I’ll repeat it once more, is that it allows
for decidedly all deviations; had it not been so firm and radical, I might
have been afraid to deviate.
And meanwhile I still continued to occupy my wretched little apartment,
to occupy it, but not to live in it: there lay my suitcase, bag, and some
things; my main residence was at Prince Sergei Sokolsky’s. I sat there, slept
there, and did so for whole weeks even . . . How it happened, I shall tell
presently, but meanwhile I’ll tell about this wretched little apartment. It was
already dear to me: here Versilov came to see me, of himself, for the first
time after that quarrel, and later came many times. I repeat, this was a time
of terrible disgrace, but also of enormous happiness . . . And everything
turned out so well then, everything smiled at me! “And why all that former
gloom?” I thought in some rapturous moments. “Why all those old, morbid
strains, my lonely and sullen childhood, my stupid dreams under the
blanket, vows, calculations, and even the ‘idea’? I had imagined and
invented all that, and it turned out that the world wasn’t like that at all; here
I am feeling so joyful and light: I have a father—Versilov; I have a friend—
Prince Seryozha; I also have . . .” But let’s drop that “also.” Alas, it was all
done in the name of love, magnanimity, honor, and later it turned out ugly,
impudent, dishonorable.

Enough.

II
HE CAME TO see me for the first time on the third day after our breakup
then. I wasn’t at home, and he stayed to wait. When I came into my tiny
closet, even though I had been waiting for him all those three days, my eyes
clouded over, as it were, and my heart gave such a throb that I even stopped
in the doorway. Fortunately, he was sitting with my landlord, who found it
necessary, so that the visitor would not be bored waiting, to become
acquainted at once and begin telling him heatedly about something. He was
a titular councillor,2 about forty years old, very pockmarked, very poor,
burdened with a consumptive wife and a sick child; of an extremely
gregarious and placid character, though also rather tactful. I was glad of his
presence, and he even helped me out, because what would I have said to
Versilov? I knew, seriously knew, all those three days, that Versilov would
come on his own, first—exactly as I wanted, because I would not have gone
to him first for anything in the world, and not out of contrariness, but
precisely out of love for him, out of some sort of jealous love—I don’t
know how to express it. And generally the reader won’t find any eloquence
in me. But though I had been waiting for him all those three days, and had
imagined to myself almost continuously how he would come in, still I had
been quite unable to picture beforehand, though I tried as hard as I could to
picture it, what he and I would suddenly start talking about after all that had
happened.
“Ah, here you are.” He held out his hand to me amicably, without getting
up from his seat. “Sit down with us. Pyotr Ippolitovich tells the most
interesting story about this stone, near the Pavlovsky barracks . . . or
somewhere there . . .”
“Yes, I know that stone,” I answered quickly, lowering myself into a
chair beside them. They were sitting at the table. The whole room was
precisely two hundred square feet. I took a deep breath.

A spark of pleasure flashed in Versilov’s eyes: it seemed he had doubts
and thought I might want to make gestures. He calmed down.
“Start again from the beginning, Pyotr Ippolitovich.” They were already
addressing each other by first name and patronymic.
“So, this happened under the late sovereign,3 sir,” Pyotr Ippolitovich
addressed me, nervously and somewhat painfully, as if suffering ahead of
time over the success of the effect. “You know that stone—a stupid stone in
the street, why, what for, it’s in everybody’s way, right, sir? The sovereign
drove by many times, and each time there was this stone. In the end, the
sovereign didn’t like it, and indeed, a whole mountain, a mountain is
standing in the street, ruining the street: ‘The stone must not be!’ Well, he
said it must not be—you understand what ‘it must not be’ means?
Remember the late tsar? What to do with the stone? Everybody’s at their
wit’s end, including the Duma,4 and mainly, I don’t remember who
precisely, but it was one of the foremost courtiers of the time who was
charged with it. So this courtier listens: they say it would cost fifteen
thousand, not less, in silver, sir (because paper banknotes had just been
converted to silver under the late sovereign). ‘How come fifteen thousand,
that’s wild!’ First the Englishmen wanted to bring rails up to it, put it on
rails, and take it away by steam; but what would that have cost? There were
no railroads yet then, except for the one to Tsarskoe Selo5 . . .”
“Well, look, they could have sawed it in pieces.” I was beginning to
frown; I was terribly vexed and ashamed in front of Versilov, but he listened
with visible pleasure. I understood that he, too, was glad of the landlord,
because he also felt abashed with me, I could see it; for me, I remember,
that even seemed touching in him.
“Precisely saw it in pieces, sir, they precisely hit upon that idea, and it
was precisely Montferrand; he was then building St. Isaac’s Cathedral.6
Saw it up, he says, and then take it away. Yes, sir, but what will that cost?”
“It won’t cost anything. Simply saw it up and take it away.”

“No, pardon me, but here you’d have to set up a machine, a steam
engine, and then again, take it away where? And then again, such a
mountain? Ten thousand, they say, you won’t get away with less, ten or
twelve thousand.”
“Listen, Pyotr Ippolitovich, that’s nonsense, it wasn’t like that . . .” But
just then Versilov winked at me inconspicuously, and in that wink I saw
such delicate compassion for the landlord, even commiseration with him,
that I liked it terribly much, and I burst out laughing.
“Well, so, so,” rejoiced the landlord, who hadn’t noticed anything and
was terribly afraid, as such storytellers always are, that he would be thrown
off by questions, “only just then some tradesman comes up to them, still a
young man, well, you know, a Russian, wedge-shaped beard, in a longskirted kaftan, and on the verge of being a little drunk . . . though, no, not
drunk, sir. So this tradesman stands there while they’re talking about it, the
Englishmen and Montferrand, and this person who’s in charge also drives
up in a carriage, listens, and gets angry: how is it they keep deciding and
can’t decide? And suddenly he notices this little tradesman standing some
distance away and smiling sort of falsely, that is, not falsely, I got it wrong,
but how should I say . . .”
“Mockingly,” Versilov put in cautiously.
“Mockingly, sir, that is, slightly mockingly, with this kindly Russian
smile, you know; well, the person, of course, takes it with vexation, you
know: ‘You in the beard, what are you waiting here for? Who are you?’
“‘Oh,’ he says, ‘I’m just looking at this little stone, Your Highness.’
Precisely, I believe, ‘Your Highness’—it was all but Prince Suvorov of
Italy, a descendant of the generalissimo7 . . . Though, no, not Suvorov, and
it’s a pity I’ve forgotten precisely who, only you know, though he’s a
highness, he’s such a pure Russian man, this Russian type, a patriot, a
developed Russian heart, so he guessed it: ‘What are you going to do,’ he
says, ‘take the stone away? What are you grinning at?’ ‘More at the
Englishmen, Your Highness, the price they’re asking is way out of

proportion, sir, because the Russian purse is fat, and they’ve got nothing to
eat at home. Allot me a hundred little roubles, Your Highness, and by
tomorrow night we’ll remove this little stone.’ Well, can you imagine such
an offer? The Englishmen, of course, want to eat him up; Montferrand
laughs; only this highness prince, he’s a Russian heart: ‘Give him a hundred
roubles!’ he says. ‘So,’ he says, ‘you’ll really take it away?’ ‘By tomorrow
night it’ll be to your satisfaction, Your Highness.’ ‘And how will you do it?’
‘That—no offense to Your Highness—is our secret, sir,’ he says, and you
know, in such Russian language. This was liked: ‘Eh, give him everything
he asks for!’ Well, so they left him there; and what do you think he did?”
The landlord paused and began looking at us with a sweet gaze.
“I don’t know,” Versilov smiled. I was frowning deeply.
“Here’s what he did, sir,” the landlord said with such triumph as if he had
done it himself. “He hired some peasants with spades, simple Russian ones,
and started digging a hole right by the stone, at the very edge; they dug all
night, made an enormous hole, exactly the size of the stone, only a couple
of inches deeper, and when they were done, he told them to gradually and
carefully dig the ground from under the stone. Well, naturally, when they
dug away under it, the stone had no support, and the balance got tipsy; and
once the balance got tipsy, they pushed the stone from the other side with
their hands, with a hurrah, Russian-style: the stone plopped right into the
hole! They straight away shoveled the dirt back over it, tamped it down
with a tamper, paved it over—smooth, the stone vanished!”
“Fancy that!” said Versilov.
“I mean, people, people come running, untold numbers of them; those
Englishmen, who had guessed long ago, stand there angry. Montferrand
arrives: This is a peasant job, he says, it’s too simple, he says. But that’s the
whole trick, that it’s simple, and it didn’t occur to you fools! And I’ll tell
you, that superior, that state personage, he just gasped, hugged him, kissed
him: ‘And where might the likes of you be from?’ ‘Yaroslavl province,
Your Highness, myself I’m a tailor by trade, but in summer I come to the

capital to sell fruit, sir.’ Well, it reached the authorities; the authorities
ordered a medal hung on him; he went around like that with the medal on
his neck, and later they say he drank himself up; you know, a Russian man,
can’t help himself! That’s why the foreigners prey on us to this day, yes, sir,
so there, sir!”
“Yes, of course, the Russian mind . . .” Versilov began.
But here, fortunately for him, the storyteller was summoned by his ailing
wife, and he ran off, otherwise I couldn’t have stood it. Versilov was
laughing.
“My dear, he entertained me for a whole hour before you came. That
stone . . . that’s everything there is of the most patriotically indecent among
such stories, but how interrupt him? You saw him, he was melting with
pleasure. And besides, the stone, it seems, is still standing there, unless I’m
mistaken, and isn’t buried in a hole at all . . .”
“Ah, my God!” I cried, “but that’s true. How did he dare! . . .”
“What’s with you? No, come now, it seems you’re quite indignant. And
he actually got it confused: I heard some such story about a stone back in
the time of my childhood, only, naturally, it wasn’t the same and wasn’t
about that stone. Good heavens, ‘it reached the authorities.’ His whole soul
sang at that moment when it ‘reached the authorities.’ In this sorry milieu,
it’s impossible to do without such anecdotes. They have a host of them—
above all from their lack of restraint. They haven’t studied anything, they
don’t know anything precisely, well, and besides cards and promotions,
they want to talk about something generally human, poetic . . . What is he,
who is he, this Pyotr Ippolitovich?”
“The poorest of beings, and also unfortunate.”
“Well, so you see, maybe he doesn’t even play cards! I repeat, while
telling this rubbish, he satisfies his love for his neighbor: you see, he
wanted to make us happy as well. The feeling of patriotism is also satisfied;

for instance, they also have an anecdote that the English offered Zavyalov8
a million only so that he wouldn’t stamp his brand on his products . . .”
“Ah, my God, I’ve heard that anecdote.”
“Who hasn’t heard it, and he knows perfectly well, as he tells it, that
you’ve certainly heard it already, but still he tells it, deliberately imagining
that you haven’t. It seems the vision of the Swedish king9 has become
outdated with them; but in my youth they repeated it with gusto, and in a
mysterious whisper, as well as the one about somebody at the beginning of
the century supposedly kneeling before the senators in the Senate.10 There
were also many anecdotes about Commandant Bashutsky11 and how the
monument was taken away. They’re terribly fond of anecdotes about the
court; for instance, the stories about Chernyshov,12 a minister in the
previous reign, how as a seventy-year-old man he made himself up so that
he looked like a thirty-year-old, so much so that the late sovereign was
astonished at his receptions . . .”
“I’ve heard that, too.”
“Who hasn’t? All these anecdotes are the height of indecency, but you
should know that this type of the indecent is much deeper and more
widespread than we think. Even in our most decent society, you meet with
the wish to lie with the purpose of making your neighbor happy, for we all
suffer from this unrestraint of the heart. Only with us the stories are of a
different kind; what they tell about America alone is something awful, and
that’s even statesmen! I confess, I myself belong to this indecent type and
have suffered from it all my life . . .”
“I’ve told the story about Chernyshov several times myself.”
“Have you really?”
“There’s another tenant here besides me, a clerk, also pockmarked, and
already old, but he’s a terribly prosaic man, and as soon as Pyotr
Ippolitovich starts talking, he immediately sets about confusing and

contradicting him. And he’s driven him to such a state that Pyotr
Ippolitovich serves him like a slave and humors him, only so as he listens.”
“That’s already another type of the indecent, and maybe even more
loathsome than the first. The first is all rapture! ‘Just let me tell you a lie—
you’ll see how well it comes out.’ The second is all spleen and prose: ‘I
won’t let you lie—when, where, in what year?’ In short, he has no heart.
My friend, always let a man lie a little—it’s innocent. Even let him lie a lot.
First, it will show your delicacy, and second, you’ll also be allowed to lie in
return—two enormous profits at once. Que diable! 34 one must love one’s
neighbor! But it’s time I left. You’ve settled in quite nicely,” he added,
getting up from his chair. “I’ll tell Sofya Andreevna and your sister that I
called and found you in good health. Good-bye, my dear.”
What, could that be all? No, this was by no means what I needed; I was
waiting for something else, the main thing, though I understood perfectly
well that it couldn’t be otherwise. I began showing him to the stairs with a
candle; the landlord also jumped over, but, in secret from Versilov, I seized
his arm with all my strength and shoved him away fiercely. He looked at me
in amazement, but effaced himself at once.
“These stairs . . .” Versilov mumbled, drawing out the words, evidently
so as to say something, and evidently for fear I might say something, “these
stairs—I’m not used to them, and you’re on the third floor, but, anyhow, I’ll
find my way now . . . Don’t trouble yourself, my dear, you’ll catch cold.”
But I didn’t leave. We were going down the second flight of stairs.
“I’ve been waiting for you all these three days,” escaped me suddenly, as
if of itself; I was breathless.
“Thank you, my dear.”
“I knew you wouldn’t fail to come.”
“And I knew you knew I wouldn’t fail to come. Thank you, my dear.”

He fell silent. We had already reached the front door, and I was still
walking behind him. He opened the door; the wind burst in at once and
blew out my candle. Here I suddenly seized him by the hand; it was
completely dark. He gave a start, but said nothing. I bent to his hand and
suddenly began kissing it greedily, several times, many times.
“My dear boy, what makes you love me so much?” he said, but now in a
quite different voice. His voice trembled, and something quite new rang in
it, as if it was not he who was speaking.
I wanted to answer something but couldn’t, and ran upstairs. He waited
without moving from the spot, and only when I reached my apartment did I
hear the street door downstairs open and slam shut noisily. I slipped into my
room past the landlord, who for some reason turned up there again, fastened
the latch, and, without lighting a candle, threw myself onto the bed, face to
the pillow, and—wept, wept. It was the first time I had wept since
Touchard’s! Sobs burst from me with such force, and I was so happy . . . but
why describe it!
I’ve written this down now without being ashamed, because maybe it
was all good, despite all its absurdity.

III
BUT, OH, DID he get it from me for that! I became a terrible despot.
Needless to say, we never mentioned this scene afterwards. On the contrary,
we met three days later as if nothing had happened—what’s more, I was
almost rude that second evening, and he was also as if dry. It happened at
my place again; for some reason I still wouldn’t go to him myself, despite
my desire to see my mother.
We talked all this time, that is, for these two whole months, only about
the most abstract subjects. And that surprises me: all we did was talk about
abstract subjects—the generally human and most necessary ones, of course,
but not concerned in the least with the essential. Yet much, very much, of
the essential needed to be defined and clarified, even urgently so, but of

those things we didn’t speak. I even said nothing about mother and Liza and
. . . well, and finally about myself, about my whole story. Whether that was
all from shame, or from some sort of youthful stupidity—I don’t know. I
suppose it was from stupidity, because shame could still have been
surmounted. And I despotized him terribly and more than once even drove
it as far as insolence, and even against my own heart: it was all done
somehow of itself, uncontrollably, I couldn’t control myself. His tone was
of a subtle mockery, as before, though always extremely affectionate
despite all. It also struck me that he much preferred coming to me himself,
so that in the end I began to see mama terribly seldom, once a week, not
more, especially in the most recent time, when I got into quite a whirl. He
would come in the evening, sit in my room and chat; he was also very fond
of chatting with the landlord; this last infuriated me in such a man as he.
The thought also came to me: can it be that he has no one to go to except
me? But I knew for certain that he had acquaintances; lately he had even
renewed many former connections in high society circles, which he had
abandoned during that last year; but it seems he wasn’t especially tempted
by them, and many were renewed only officially, while he preferred coming
to me. It sometimes touched me very much that, on coming in of an
evening, he seemed to grow timid almost every time as he opened the door,
and in the first moment always peeked into my eyes with a strange
anxiousness, as if to say, “Won’t I be bothering you? Tell me and I’ll go
away.” He even said it sometimes. Once, for instance, precisely in the most
recent time, he came in when I was already fully dressed in a suit I had just
received from the tailor and was about to go to “Prince Seryozha,” so as to
set off with him where I had to go (I’ll explain where later). But he came in
and sat down, probably not noticing that I was about to leave; there were
moments when he was overcome by an extremely strange
absentmindedness. As if on purpose, he began talking about the landlord. I
blew up:
“Eh, devil take the landlord!”
“Ah, my dear,” he suddenly got up from his place, “it seems you’re about
to go out, and I’m bothering you . . . Forgive me, please.”

And he humbly hastened to leave. This humility towards me from such a
man, from such a worldly and independent man, who had so much of his
own, at once resurrected in my heart all my tenderness for him and all my
trust in him. But if he loved me so, why didn’t he stop me then in the time
of my disgrace? A word from him then—and maybe I would have held
back. However, maybe not. But he did see this foppishness, this
fanfaronade, this Matvei (once I even wanted to give him a ride in my
sledge, but he wouldn’t get in, and it even happened several times that he
didn’t want to get in), he did see that I was throwing money around—and
not a word, not a word, not even out of curiosity! That astonishes me to this
day, even now. And I, naturally, was not the least bit ceremonious with him
then and let everything show, though, of course, also without a word of
explanation. He didn’t ask, and I didn’t speak.
However, two or three times it was as if we did also start speaking about
the essential. I asked him once, at the beginning, soon after he renounced
the inheritance, how he was going to live now.
“Somehow, my friend,” he said with extraordinary calm.
Now I know that even Tatyana Pavlovna’s tiny capital of about five
thousand was half spent on Versilov in these last two years.
Another time we somehow began talking about mama:
“My friend,” he suddenly said sadly, “I often said to Sofya Andreevna at
the beginning of our union—at the beginning, and the middle, and the end
as well, however: ‘My dear, I’m tormenting you, and I’ll torment you
thoroughly, and I’m not sorry, as long as you’re before me; but if you
should die, I know I’d do myself in with punishment.’”
However, I remember he was especially open that evening:
“If only I were a weak-tempered nonentity and suffered from the
awareness of it! But no, I know that I’m infinitely strong, and what do you
think my strength is? Precisely this spontaneous power of getting along
with anything, which is so characteristic of all intelligent people of our

generation. Nothing can destroy me, nothing can exterminate me, nothing
can astonish me. I’m as tenacious as a yard dog. I can feel in the most
comfortable way two contrary feelings at the same time—and that, of
course, not by my own will. But nonetheless I know it’s dishonest, mainly
because it’s all too reasonable. I’ve lived to be nearly fifty, and so far I
don’t know whether it’s good that I’ve done so, or bad. Of course, I love
life, and that follows directly from things, but for a man like me, to love life
is base. Lately something new has begun, and the Krafts don’t survive, they
shoot themselves. But it’s clear that the Krafts are stupid; well, and we’re
intelligent—so it’s impossible to draw any analogy here, and the question
still remains open. And can it be only for such as we that the earth stands?
Yes, in all likelihood; but that is too cheerless an idea. However . . .
however, the question still remains open.”
He spoke with sadness, and even so I didn’t know whether he was sincere
or not. There was always some wrinkle in him that he wouldn’t drop for
anything.

IV
I SHOWERED HIM with questions then, I threw myself on him like a
hungry man on bread. He always answered me readily and
straightforwardly, but in the final end he always brought it down to the most
general aphorisms, so that, in essence, nothing could be drawn from it. And
yet all these questions had troubled me all my life, and, I confess frankly,
while still in Moscow, I postponed their resolution precisely until our
meeting in Petersburg. I even told it to him directly, and he didn’t laugh at
me—on the contrary, I remember, he shook my hand. On general politics
and social questions, I could extract almost nothing from him, and it was
these questions that troubled me most, in view of my “idea.” Of the likes of
Dergachev, I once tore the observation from him “that they were beneath
any criticism,” but at the same time he added strangely that he “reserved for
himself the right not to attach any importance to his opinion.” Of how the
contemporary states and world would end and what would bring about a
renewal of the social world, he kept silent for terribly long, but one day I
finally tortured a few words out of him:

“I think it will all come about somehow in an extremely ordinary way,”
he said once. “Quite simply, all the states, despite all balancing of budgets
and ‘absence of deficits,’ un beau matin35 will become utterly confused,
and each and every one of them will refuse to pay up, so that each and
every one of them will be renewed in a general bankruptcy. Meanwhile, all
the conservative elements of the whole world will be opposed to that, for it
will be they who are the shareholders and creditors, and they will not want
to allow the bankruptcy. Then, of course, there will begin a general
oxidation, so to speak; the Yid will arrive in quantity, and a kingdom of
Yids will begin; but all those who never had any shares, and generally never
had anything, that is, all the beggars, naturally will not want to participate
in the oxidation . . . A struggle will begin, and after seventy-seven defeats,
the beggars will annihilate the shareholders, take their shares from them,
and sit in their place—as shareholders, of course. And maybe they’ll say
something new, or maybe not. Most likely they’ll also go bankrupt. Beyond
that, my friend, I can’t predict anything in the destinies that will change the
face of this world. However, look in the Apocalypse . . .”
“But can it all be so material? Can the present-day world end only
because of finances?”
“Oh, naturally, I’ve taken only one little corner of the picture, but that
corner is connected with everything by, so to speak, indissoluble bonds.”
“What, then, is to be done?”
“Ah, my God, don’t be in a hurry; it won’t all come so soon. Generally,
it’s best to do nothing; at least your conscience is at peace, since you
haven’t taken part in anything.”
“Eh, come on, talk business. I want to know precisely what I’m to do and
how I’m to live.”
“What are you to do, my dear? Be honest, never lie, don’t covet your
neighbor’s house, in short, read the ten commandments: everything’s
written there for all time.”

“Come on, come on, that’s all so old, and besides—it’s just words, and I
need action.”
“Well, if you’re quite overcome with boredom, try loving someone, or
something, or even simply becoming attached to something.”
“You just laugh! And besides, what am I alone to do with your ten
commandments?”
“But if you fulfill them, despite all your questions and doubts, you’ll be a
great man.”
“Unknown to anyone.”
“Nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest.”13
“No, you’re decidedly laughing!”
“Well, if you take it so much to heart, then it would be best to try and
specialize quickly, take up construction or law; then you’ll be occupied with
real and serious business, and you can settle down and forget about trifles.”
I said nothing—well, what could I get from that? And yet after each such
conversation, I was more troubled than before. Besides, I saw clearly that
there was always as if some mystery left in him; it was this that drew me to
him more and more.
“Listen,” I interrupted him one day, “I always suspected that you were
saying all this just so, from spite and out of suffering, but secretly, within
yourself, it’s you who are a fanatic of some higher idea and are only hiding
it or ashamed to admit it.”
“Thank you, my dear.”
“Listen, there’s nothing higher than being useful. Tell me, how can I be
of greatest use at this given moment? I know you can’t decide that; but I’m

only seeking your opinion: you tell me, and I’ll go and do as you tell me, I
swear to you! Well, what is the great thought?”
“Well, to turn stones into bread—there’s a great thought.”14
“The greatest? No, truly, you’ve pointed out a whole path; tell me, then:
is it the greatest?”
“A very great one, my friend, a very great one, but not the greatest; great,
but secondary, and only great in the given moment. Man eats and doesn’t
remember it; on the contrary, he’ll say at once: ‘Well, so I’ve eaten, and
now what do I do?’ The question remains eternally open.”
“You once talked about ‘Geneva ideas.’ I didn’t understand—what are
‘Geneva ideas’?”
“Geneva ideas—it’s virtue without Christ, my friend, today’s ideas, or,
better to say, the idea of the whole of today’s civilization.15 In short, it’s—
one of those long stories that are very boring to begin, and it would be
much better if we talked about other things, and still better if we were silent
about other things.”
“All you want to do is be silent!”
“My friend, remember that to be silent is good, safe, and beautiful.”
“Beautiful?”
“Of course. Silence is always beautiful, and a silent person is always
more beautiful than one who talks.”
“But to talk as you and I do is, of course, the same as being silent. Devil
take that sort of beauty, and furthermore, devil take that sort of profit!”
“My dear,” he said to me suddenly, in a somewhat changed tone, even
with feeling and with a sort of special insistence, “my dear, I by no means
want to seduce you with any sort of bourgeois virtue instead of your ideals,

nor do I insist that ‘happiness is better than heroism’; on the contrary,
heroism is higher than any happiness, and the capacity for it alone already
constitutes happiness. So that’s settled between us. I respect you precisely
for being able, in our soured time, to cultivate some sort of ‘idea of your
own’ in your soul (don’t worry, I remember it very well). But all the same
it’s impossible not to think about measure, too, because now you precisely
want a resounding life, to set something on fire, to smash something, to rise
higher than all Russia, to sweep over like a storm cloud and leave everyone
in fear and admiration, and disappear into the North American States.
Surely there’s something of that kind in your soul, and that’s why I consider
it necessary to warn you, because I’ve sincerely come to love you, my
dear.”
What could I get from that as well? Here there was only a worry about
me, about my material fate; it spoke for the father, with his prosaic though
kindly feelings; but was that what I needed, in view of the ideas for which
every honest father should send his son even to his death, as the ancient
Horatius sent his sons for the idea of Rome?16
I often pestered him with religion, but here the fog was thickest of all. To
the question, What am I to do in this sense? he replied in the stupidest way,
as to a little boy: “You must believe in God, my dear.”
“Well, and what if I don’t believe in all that?” I once cried in irritation.
“Splendid, my dear.”
“How, splendid?”
“A most excellent sign, my friend; even the most trustworthy, because
our Russian atheist, if only he’s a true atheist and has a bit of intelligence, is
the best man in the whole world and always inclined to treat God nicely,
because he’s unfailingly kind, and he’s kind because he’s immeasurably
pleased that he’s an atheist. Our atheists are respectable people and
trustworthy in the highest degree, the support, so to speak, of the fatherland
. . .”

That, of course, was something, but not what I wanted; only once did he
speak his mind, only so strangely that he surprised me most of all then,
especially in view of all these Catholicisms and chains I had heard about in
connection with him.
“My dear,” he said to me once, not at home, but one time in the street,
after a long conversation; I was seeing him off. “My friend, to love people
as they are is impossible. And yet one must. And therefore do good to them,
clenching your feelings, holding your nose, and shutting your eyes (this last
is necessary). Endure evil from them, not getting angry with them if
possible, ‘remembering that you, too, are a human being.’ Naturally, you’re
in a position to be severe with them, if it’s been granted you to be a little bit
smarter than the average. People are mean by nature and love to love out of
fear; don’t give in to such love and don’t cease to despise it. Somewhere in
the Koran, Allah bids the prophet to look upon the ‘recalcitrant’ as mice, to
do good to them and pass by—somewhat arrogant, but right. Know how to
despise them even when they’re good, for most often it’s just here that
they’re nasty. Oh, my dear, I’m judging by myself in saying that! He who is
only a little bit better than stupid cannot live and not despise himself—
whether he’s honest or dishonest makes no difference. To love one’s
neighbor and not despise him is impossible. In my opinion, man is created
with a physical inability to love his neighbor. There’s some mistake in
words here, from the very beginning, and ‘love for mankind’ should be
understood as just for that mankind which you yourself have created in your
soul (in other words, you’ve created your own self and the love for yourself
), and which therefore will never exist in reality.”
“Never exist?”
“My friend, I agree that this would be rather stupid, but here the blame
isn’t mine; and since I wasn’t consulted at the time of the creation of the
world, I reserve for myself the right to have my own opinion about it.”
“How can they call you a Christian after that,” I cried, “a monk with
chains, a preacher? I don’t understand!”

“But who calls me that?”
I told him; he listened very attentively, but stopped the conversation.
I simply can’t remember what occasioned this conversation, which was
so memorable for me; but he even became irritated, which almost never
happened with him. He had spoken passionately and without mockery, as if
he weren’t saying it to me. But once again I didn’t believe him: could he
really speak seriously about such things with the likes of me?

Chapter Two
I
ON THAT MORNING, the fifteenth of November, I precisely found him
with “Prince Seryozha.” It was I who brought him together with the prince,
but they had enough points of contact even without me (I’m speaking of
those former stories abroad and so on). Besides that, the prince had given
his word to allot him at least one-third of the inheritance, which would
certainly come to about twenty thousand. To me, I remember, it was terribly
strange then that he allotted him only a third and not a whole half; but I said
nothing. The prince gave this promise then on his own; Versilov had no part
in it, never mentioned it by half a little word; the prince himself popped up
with it, and Versilov only allowed it silently and never once recalled it
afterwards, never even showed by a look that he remembered anything at all
about the promise. I’ll note incidentally that the prince was decidedly
charmed by him at first, especially by his talk, he even went into raptures
and several times spoke of it to me. Sometimes, alone with me, he
exclaimed about himself, almost in despair, that he was “so uneducated, that
he was on such a false path! . . .” Oh, we were still such friends then! . . . I
kept trying then to instill only good things about the prince into Versilov, I
defended his failings, though I saw them myself; but Versilov kept silent or
smiled.
“If he does have failings, he has at least as many virtues as failings!” I
once exclaimed, alone with Versilov.
“God, how you flatter him,” he laughed.
“How do you mean, flatter?” I didn’t understand at first.
“As many virtues! Why, then his relics will be revealed,17 if he has as
many virtues as he has failings!”

But, of course, this was not an opinion. Generally he somehow avoided
speaking about the prince then, as he generally did about all essentials; but
about the prince especially. I already suspected even then that he went to
see the prince without me as well, and that they had special relations, but I
allowed for that. I also wasn’t jealous that he talked with him as if more
seriously than with me, more positively, so to speak, and was less given to
mockery; but I was so happy then that it even pleased me. I also excused it
by the fact that the prince was slightly limited, and therefore liked precision
in words, and even didn’t understand certain witticisms at all. And then,
recently, he somehow began to emancipate himself. His feelings towards
Versilov began to change, as it were. The sensitive Versilov noticed it. I’ll
also say beforehand that at that time the prince changed towards me as well,
even all too visibly; there remained only some dead forms of our original,
almost ardent friendship. Yet I still kept going to see him; I could hardly not
go, however, having been drawn into all that. Oh, how unskillful I was then,
and can it be that stupidity of heart alone can drive a person to such
incompetence and humiliation? I took money from him and thought that it
was nothing, that it was even right. Not so, however; I knew even then that
it was wrong, but—I simply gave it little thought. It wasn’t for money that I
went to see him, though I needed money terribly. I knew that I didn’t go
there because of money, but I realized that I came every day to take money.
But I was in a whirl and, besides all that, something else was in my soul
then—was singing in my soul!
When I came in, at around eleven o’clock in the morning, I found
Versilov just finishing some long tirade; the prince was listening, pacing the
room, and Versilov was sitting down. The prince seemed to be somewhat
agitated. Versilov could almost always make him agitated. The prince was
an extremely susceptible being, naïvely so, which on many occasions made
me look on him condescendingly. But, I repeat, in the last few days
something spitefully tooth-baring had appeared in him. He stopped when he
saw me, and something as if twitched in his face. I knew in myself what
explained that shadow of displeasure that morning, but I hadn’t expected his
face to twitch so much. It was known to me that he had accumulated all
sorts of troubles, but the disgusting thing was that I knew only the tenth part
of them—the rest was a hard and fast secret for me. Therefore it was

disgusting and stupid that I got at him so often with my consolations, with
advice, and even grinned condescendingly at his weakness of getting beside
himself “over such trifles.” He said nothing, but it was impossible for him
not to hate me terribly at such moments; I was in all too false a position and
didn’t even suspect it. Oh, God is my witness, I didn’t suspect the main
thing!
Nevertheless, he politely offered me his hand, and Versilov nodded his
head without interrupting his speech. I sprawled on the sofa. What tone I
had then, what manners! I pranced still more, treating his acquaintances as
my own . . . Oh, if it were possible to do it all over again now, I’d know
how to behave myself very differently!
Two words, so as not to forget: the prince was living in the same
apartment then, but occupied almost all of it; the owner of the apartment,
Mrs. Stolbeev, had stayed for only a month and gone off somewhere again.

II
THEY WERE TALKING about the nobility. I’ll note that this idea
sometimes troubled the prince very much, despite all his air of progressism,
and I even suspect that much that was bad in his life came and originated
from this idea; valuing his princehood and being destitute, he squandered
money all his life out of false pride and got entangled in debts. Versilov
hinted to him several times that this was not what made for princehood, and
wanted to implant a higher notion in his heart; but in the end it was as if the
prince began to be offended at being taught. Evidently there had been
something of the sort that morning, but I didn’t catch the beginning.
Versilov’s words seemed retrograde to me at first, but then he got better.
“The word ‘honor’ means duty,” he said (I’m conveying only the sense,
as far as I remember it). “When the state is ruled by a dominant estate, the
land stands firm. The dominant estate always has its honor and its
profession of honor, which may also be wrong, but which almost always
serves to bind and strengthen the land; it is useful morally, but more so
politically. But the slaves suffer, that is, all who do not belong to that estate.

So that they won’t suffer, they are granted equal rights. That has been done
with us as well, and it’s splendid. But by all experience, everywhere so far
(in Europe, that is), with the equalizing of rights has come a lowering of the
sense of honor and therefore of duty. Egoism has replaced the former
binding idea, and everything has broken down into the freedom of persons.
Set free, left without a binding thought, they have finally lost all higher
connection to such a degree that they have even stopped defending the
freedom they obtained. But the Russian type of nobility has never
resembled the European. Even now our nobility, having lost its rights, could
remain a higher estate as the guardian of honor, light, science, and the
higher idea, and, above all, without shutting itself up in a separate caste,
which would be the death of the idea. On the contrary, the gateway to this
estate was thrown open with us all too long ago; and now the time has come
to open it definitively. Let every deed of honor, science, and valor give
anyone the right to join the higher category of people. In this way the estate
turns by itself into what is merely a gathering of the best people, in the
literal and true sense, and not in the former sense of a privileged caste. In
this new or, better, renewed form, the estate might hold out.”
The prince bared his teeth:
“What kind of nobility would it be then? That’s some sort of Masonic
lodge you’re planning, not a nobility.”
I repeat, the prince was terribly uneducated. I even swung around on the
sofa in vexation, though I did not quite agree with Versilov. Versilov
understood only too well that the prince was showing his teeth.
“I don’t know in what sense you spoke of Masonry,” he replied,
“however, if even a Russian prince rejects such an idea, then, naturally, its
time hasn’t come yet. The idea of honor and enlightenment as the covenant
of each one who wants to join the estate, which is open and continually
renewed, is of course a utopia, but why is it impossible? If this thought still
lives, though only in a few heads, it’s not lost yet, but shines like a fiery
spot in the deep darkness.”

“You love to use the words ‘higher thought,’ ‘great thought,’ ‘binding
idea,’ and so on. I’d like to know, what essentially do you mean by the
words ‘a great thought’?”
“I really don’t know how to answer you on that, my dear prince.”
Versilov smiled subtly. “If I confess to you that I’m unable to answer it
myself, that would be more accurate. A great thought is most often a feeling
that sometimes goes without definition for too long. I know only that it was
always that from which living life flowed—that is, not mental and
contrived, but, on the contrary, amusing and gay; so that the higher idea
from which it flows is decidedly necessary, to the general vexation, of
course.”
“Why vexation?”
“Because it’s boring to live with ideas, and without ideas it’s always
fun.”
The prince ate the pill.
“And what, in your opinion, is this living life?” (He was obviously
angry.)
“I don’t know that either, Prince; I only know that it must be something
terribly simple, most ordinary, staring us in the face every day and every
minute, and so simple that we just can’t believe it could be so simple, and
naturally we’ve been passing it by for many thousands of years now
without noticing or recognizing it.”
“I only wanted to say that your idea of the nobility is at the same time a
denial of the nobility,” said the prince.
“Well, since you’re so insistent, maybe the nobility never existed among
us.”
“This is all terribly obscure and vague. If you speak, then, in my opinion,
you have to develop . . .”

The prince furrowed his brow and glanced fleetingly at the wall clock.
Versilov got up and took his hat.
“Develop?” he said. “No, better not develop, and what’s more it’s my
passion—to speak without developing. That’s really so. And here’s another
strange thing: if it happens that I begin to develop a thought I believe in, the
result is almost always that by the end of the explanation I myself have
ceased to believe in what I’ve explained. I’m afraid I’ll fall into that now,
too. Good-bye, dear Prince; I’m always unpardonably garrulous with you.”
He left. The prince politely saw him off, but I felt offended.
“What are you so ruffled up for?” he suddenly shot out, not looking and
walking past me to the desk.
“I’m ruffled up,” I began with a tremor in my voice, “because, finding
such a strange change in your tone towards me and even towards Versilov, I
. . . Of course, Versilov maybe did begin in a somewhat retrograde way, but
he got better and . . . his words maybe contained a profound thought, but
you simply didn’t understand and . . .”
“I simply don’t want anybody popping up to teach me and considering
me a little boy!” he snapped almost with wrath.
“Prince, such words . . .”
“Please, no theatrical gestures—do me a favor. I know that what I’m
doing is mean, that I’m a squanderer, a gambler, maybe a thief . . . yes, a
thief, because I lost my family’s money at gambling, but I don’t want any
judges over me. Don’t want it and won’t allow it. I’m my own judge. And
why these ambiguities? If he wanted to say something to me, then speak
directly and don’t prophesy in a foggy muddle. But to say that to me,
you’ve got to have the right, you’ve got to be honorable yourself . . .”
“First of all, I didn’t catch the beginning and don’t know what you were
talking about, and second, how is Versilov dishonorable, may I ask?”

“Enough, I beg you, enough. Yesterday you asked for three hundred
roubles—here it is . . .” He put the money on the table in front of me, and
himself sat in an armchair, leaned back nervously, and crossed one leg over
the other. I stopped in embarrassment.
“I don’t know . . .” I murmured, “I did ask you . . . and I need the money
very badly now, but in view of such a tone . . .”
“Forget the tone. If I said anything sharp, forgive me. I assure you, I have
other things on my mind. Listen to this: I’ve received a letter from Moscow;
my brother Sasha—he’s still a child, you know—died four days ago. My
father, as you’re also aware, has been paralyzed for two years, and now they
write that he’s worse, can’t say a word, and doesn’t recognize anybody.
They’re glad of the inheritance there and want to take him abroad; but the
doctor writes to me that it’s unlikely he’ll live even two weeks. Which
means that mother, my sister, and I are left, and that means I’m almost
alone now . . . Well, in short, I’m alone . . . This inheritance . . . This
inheritance—oh, maybe it would be better if it didn’t come at all! But here’s
precisely what I wanted to tell you: I promised Andrei Petrovich a
minimum of twenty thousand from this inheritance . . . And meanwhile,
imagine, owing to formalities, so far it’s been impossible to do anything. I
even . . . we, that is . . . that is, my father hasn’t come into possession of this
estate yet. Meanwhile, I’ve lost so much money these last three weeks, and
that scoundrel Stebelkov charges such interest . . . I’ve now given you
almost the last . . .”
“Oh, Prince, if so . . .”
“I don’t mean that, I don’t mean that. Stebelkov is sure to bring some
today, and I’ll have enough to tide me over, but devil knows about this
Stebelkov! I begged him to get me ten thousand, so that I could at least give
ten thousand to Andrei Petrovich. My promise to allot him a third torments
me, tortures me. I gave my word and I must keep it. And, I swear to you,
I’m dying to free myself of obligations at least on that side. They’re a
burden to me, a burden, unbearable! This burdensome connection . . . I

can’t see Andrei Petrovich, because I can’t look him straight in the eye . . .
Why, then, does he abuse it?”
“What does he abuse, Prince?” I stopped before him in amazement. “Has
he ever as much as hinted to you?”
“Oh, no, and I appreciate that, but I’ve hinted to myself. And, finally, I’m
getting sucked in deeper and deeper . . . This Stebelkov . . .”
“Listen, Prince, please calm down. I see that the longer you go on, the
more troubled you become, and yet maybe it’s all just a mirage. Oh, I’ve
gotten in deep myself, unpardonably, meanly; but I know it’s only
temporary . . . I just need to win back a certain figure, and then tell me, with
this three hundred, I owe you about two thousand five hundred, is that
right?”
“I don’t believe I asked you for it,” the prince suddenly snarled.
“You say: ten thousand to Versilov. If I do borrow from you now, then, of
course, this money will be credited against Versilov’s twenty thousand; I
won’t allow it otherwise. But . . . but I’ll probably pay it back myself . . .
No, can you possibly think Versilov comes to you for money?”
“It would be easier for me if he did come to me for money,” the prince
uttered mysteriously.
“You speak of some ‘burdensome connection’ . . . If you mean with
Versilov and me, then, by God, that is offensive. And, finally, you say, why
isn’t he like what he teaches—that’s your logic! And, first of all, it’s not
logic, allow me to inform you of that, because even if he weren’t, he could
still preach the truth . . . And, finally, what is this word ‘preaches’? You say
‘prophet.’ Tell me, was it you who called him a ‘women’s prophet’ in
Germany?”
“No, it wasn’t.”
“Stebelkov told me it was you.”

“He lied. I’m no expert at giving mocking nicknames. But if a man
preaches honor, let him be honorable himself—that’s my logic, and if it’s
wrong, it makes no difference. I want it to be so, and it will be so. And no
one, no one dares to come and judge me in my own house and consider me
a baby! Enough,” he cried, waving his hand to keep me from going on.
“Ah, at last!”
The door opened and Stebelkov came in.

III
HE WAS STILL the same, dressed in the same foppish clothes, thrust his
chest out in the same way, looked with the same stupid gaze, had the same
fancy about his own slyness, and was greatly pleased with himself. This
time, as he came in, he looked around somehow strangely; there was
something peculiarly cautious and keen in his gaze, as if he wanted to guess
something from our physiognomies. However, he instantly calmed down,
and a selfconfident smile shone on his lips, that “ingratiatingly insolent ”
smile, which I still found unutterably vile.
I had long known that he tormented the prince greatly. He had already
come once or twice while I was there. I . . . I also had had one contact with
him that past month, but this time, for a certain reason, I was slightly
surprised at his coming.
“One moment,” the prince said to him without greeting him, and, turning
his back to us, began taking the necessary papers and accounts out of his
desk. As for me, I was decidedly offended by the prince’s last words; the
allusion to Versilov being dishonorable was so clear (and so astonishing!)
that it was impossible to let it go without a radical explanation. But this was
impossible in front of Stebelkov. I sprawled on the sofa again and opened a
book that was lying in front of me.
“Belinsky, part two!18 That’s something new; you wish to enlighten
yourself ?” I called out to the prince—very affectedly, it seems.

He was very busy and hurried, but he suddenly turned at my words.
“Leave that book alone, I beg you,” he said sharply.
This was going beyond the limits, and above all—in front of Stebelkov!
As if on purpose, Stebelkov grinned slyly and disgustingly, and nodded
furtively to me towards the prince. I turned away from the stupid fellow.
“Don’t be angry, Prince; I yield you up to the most important person, and
efface myself for the time being . . .”
I decided to be casual.
“Is that me—the most important person?” Stebelkov picked up, merrily
pointing his finger at himself.
“Yes, you; the most important person is you, and you know it yourself.”
“No, sir, excuse me. There’s a second person everywhere in the world. I
am a second person. There’s a first person, and there’s a second person. The
first person acts, and the second person takes. Which means the second
person comes out as the first person, and the first person as the second
person. Is that so or not?”
“It may be so, only as usual I don’t understand you.”
“Excuse me. There was a revolution in France and everybody was
executed. Napoleon came and took everything. The revolution is the first
person, and Napoleon the second person. But it turned out that Napoleon
became the first person, and the revolution became the second person. Is
that so or not?”
I’ll note, incidentally, that in his speaking to me about the French
Revolution, I saw something of his earlier slyness, which amused me
greatly: he still continued to regard me as some sort of revolutionary, and
each time he met me, he found it necessary to speak about something of that
sort.

“Let’s go,” said the prince, and they both went out to the other room. Left
alone, I decided definitively to give him back his three hundred roubles as
soon as Stebelkov left. I had extreme need of this money, but I decided.
They stayed there for about ten minutes quite unheard, and suddenly
began talking loudly. They both began talking, but the prince suddenly
started to shout, as if in strong irritation, reaching the point of fury. He
could sometimes be very hot-tempered, so that even I let it pass. But at that
moment a footman came in to announce someone; I pointed him to their
room, and everything instantly quieted down there. The prince quickly
came out with a preoccupied face, but smiling; the footman rushed off, and
half a minute later the prince’s visitor came in.
This was an important visitor, with aiguillettes and a coronet, a
gentleman of no more than thirty, of a high-society and rather stern
appearance. I warn the reader that Prince Sergei Petrovich did not yet
belong in any real sense to Petersburg high society, despite all his
passionate desire (I knew about the desire), and so he must have terribly
appreciated such a call. This acquaintance, as I was informed, had only just
begun, after great efforts on the prince’s part; the guest was now returning a
visit, but unfortunately he had caught the host unawares. I saw with what
suffering and what a lost look the prince turned for an instant to Stebelkov;
but Stebelkov endured his gaze as if nothing was wrong and, without the
slightest thought of effacing himself, casually sat down on the sofa and
began ruffling his hair with his hand, probably as a token of independence.
He even made some sort of important face—in short, he was decidedly
impossible. As for me, I was certainly able to behave myself by then and, of
course, would not have disgraced anyone, but what was my amazement
when I caught that same lost, pitiful, and spiteful gaze of the prince on
myself as well: it meant he was ashamed of us both and put me on a par
with Stebelkov. This idea drove me to fury; I sprawled still more and began
flipping through the book with such an air as if nothing concerned me.
Stebelkov, on the contrary, goggled his eyes, leaned forward, and began
listening to their conversation, probably supposing that this was both polite
and amiable. The guest glanced once or twice at Stebelkov—and also at me,
incidentally.

They began talking of family news; this gentleman had once known the
prince’s mother, who belonged to a well-known family. As far as I could
conclude, the guest, despite his amiability and seeming ingenuousness of
tone, was very stiff and, of course, valued himself enough to consider his
visit a great honor even for whoever it might be. If the prince had been
alone—that is, without us—I’m sure he would have been more dignified
and resourceful; now, though, something peculiarly tremulous in his smile,
maybe much too amiable, and some strange distractedness betrayed him.
They had not yet been sitting for five minutes when suddenly another
guest was announced and, as if on purpose, also of a compromising sort. I
knew this one well and had heard a lot about him, though he didn’t know
me at all. He was still a very young man, though already about twenty-three
years old, charmingly dressed, of a good family, and a handsome fellow
himself, but—unquestionably of bad society. A year ago he had still been
serving in one of the most distinguished horse-guard regiments, but he had
been forced to retire, and everyone knew the reasons why. His relations
even published in the newspapers that they were not answerable for his
debts, but he continued his carousing even now, obtaining money at ten
percent a month, gambling terribly in the gambling houses, and squandering
all he had on a notorious Frenchwoman. The thing was that about a week
earlier he had managed to win some twelve thousand in one evening, and he
was triumphant. He was on a friendly footing with the prince; they often
gambled together as partners; but the prince even gave a start on seeing
him, I noticed it from where I sat: this boy was as if in his own home
everywhere, spoke loudly and gaily, was unembarrassed by anything, and
said whatever came to his mind, and naturally it would never have come
into his head that our host was trembling so before his guest on account of
his company.
He came in, interrupting their conversation, and at once began telling
about yesterday’s gambling, even before he sat down.
“I believe you were also there,” he turned at the third phrase to the
important guest, taking him for one of his circle, but, seeing better

immediately, he cried, “Ah, forgive me, but I took you also for someone
from yesterday!”
“Alexei Vladimirovich Darzan, Ippolit Alexandrovich Nashchokin,” the
prince hastily introduced them. The boy could, after all, be presented: the
family name was good and well-known, but he hadn’t introduced us earlier,
and we went on sitting in our corners. I decidedly did not want to turn my
head to them; but Stebelkov, at the sight of the young man, began to grin
joyfully and obviously threatened to start talking. I was even beginning to
find it all amusing.
“I met you often last year at Countess Verigin’s,” said Darzan.
“I remember you, but then, I believe, you were in uniform,” Nashchokin
replied benignly.
“Yes, in uniform, but thanks to . . . Ah, Stebelkov, so you’re here? What
brings him here? It’s precisely thanks to these fine sirs that I’m no longer in
uniform,” he pointed straight at Stebelkov and burst out laughing.
Stebelkov, too, laughed joyfully, probably taking it as a compliment. The
prince blushed and hastily turned to Nashchokin with some question, while
Darzan went over to Stebelkov and began talking to him very vehemently
about something, but now in a low voice.
“It seems you became very well acquainted with Katerina Nikolaevna
Akhmakov abroad?” the guest asked the prince.
“Oh, yes, I knew . . .”
“It seems there will be some news here soon. They say she’s going to
marry Baron Bjoring.”
“That’s right!” cried Darzan.
“You . . . know it for certain?” the prince asked Nashchokin, visibly
agitated and uttering his question with particular emphasis.

“I was told so; it seems people are already talking about it; however, I
don’t know for certain.”
“Oh, it’s certain!” Darzan went over to them. “Dubasov told me
yesterday; he’s always the first to know such news. And the prince ought to
know . . .”
Nashchokin paused for Darzan and again addressed the prince:
“She rarely appears in society now.”
“Her father has been sick this last month,” the prince observed somehow
drily.
“She seems to be an adventurous lady!” Darzan blurted out suddenly.
I raised my head and straightened up.
“I have the pleasure of knowing Katerina Nikolaevna personally and take
upon myself the duty of assuring you that all the scandalous rumors are
nothing but lies and infamy . . . and have been invented by those . . . who
circled around but didn’t succeed.”
Having broken off so stupidly, I fell silent, still looking at them all with a
flushed face and sitting bolt upright. They all turned to me, but suddenly
Stebelkov tittered; Darzan was struck at first, but then grinned.
“Arkady Makarovich Dolgoruky,” the prince indicated me to Darzan.
“Ah, believe me, Prince,” Darzan addressed me frankly and
goodnaturedly, “I’m not speaking for myself; if there was any gossip, it
wasn’t I who spread it.”
“Oh, I didn’t mean you!” I answered quickly, but Stebelkov had already
burst into inadmissible laughter, and that precisely, as became clear later,
because Darzan had called me “prince.” My infernal last name mucked
things up here as well. Even now I blush at the thought that I—from shame,

of course—did not dare at that moment to pick up this stupidity and declare
aloud that I was simply Dolgoruky. It was the first time in my life that this
had happened. Darzan gazed in perplexity at me and at the laughing
Stebelkov.
“Ah, yes! Who was that pretty thing I just met on your stairs, sharp-eyed
and fair-haired?” he suddenly asked the prince.
“I really don’t know,” the latter answered quickly, blushing.
“Then who would know?” Darzan laughed.
“Though it . . . it might have been . . .” the prince somehow faltered.
“It . . . but it was precisely his sister, Lizaveta Makarovna!” Stebelkov
suddenly pointed at me. “Because I also met her earlier . . .”
“Ah, indeed!” the prince picked up, but this time with an extremely solid
and serious expression on his face. “It must have been Lizaveta Makarovna,
a close friend of Anna Fyodorovna Stolbeev, whose apartment I’m now
living in. She must have come calling today on Darya Onisimovna, who is
also a good friend of Anna Fyodorovna’s and in charge of the house in her
absence . . .”
That was all exactly how it was. This Darya Onisimovna was the mother
of poor Olya, whose story I have already told and whom Tatyana Pavlovna
finally sheltered with Mrs. Stolbeev. I knew perfectly well that Liza used to
visit Mrs. Stolbeev and later occasionally visited poor Darya Onisimovna,
whom they all came to love very much; but suddenly, after this,
incidentally, extremely sensible statement from the prince, and especially
after Stebelkov’s stupid outburst, or maybe because I had just been called
“prince,” suddenly, owing to all that, I blushed all over. Fortunately, just
then Nashchokin got up to leave; he offered his hand to Darzan as well. The
moment Stebelkov and I were left alone, he suddenly started nodding to me
towards Darzan, who was standing in the doorway with his back to us. I
shook my fist at Stebelkov.

A minute later Darzan also left, having arranged with the prince to meet
the next day without fail at some place they had already settled on—a
gambling house, naturally. On his way out he shouted something to
Stebelkov and bowed slightly to me. As soon as he went out, Stebelkov
jumped up from his place and stood in the middle of the room with a raised
finger:
“Last week that little squire pulled off the following stunt: he gave a
promissory note and falsified Averyanov’s name on it. And the nice little
note still exists in that guise, only one doesn’t do such things! It’s criminal.
Eight thousand.”
“And surely it’s you who have this note?” I glanced at him ferociously.
“I have a bank, sir, I have a mont-de-piété,36 not promissory notes. Have
you heard of such a mont-de-piété in Paris? Bread and charity for the poor. I
have a mont-de-piété . . .”
The prince stopped him rudely and spitefully:
“What are you doing here? Why did you stay?”
“Ah!” Stebelkov quickly began nodding with his eyes. “And that? What
about that?”
“No, no, no, not that,” the prince shouted and stamped his foot, “I told
you!”
“Ah, well, if so . . . then so . . . Only it’s not so . . .”
He turned sharply and, inclining his head and rounding his back,
suddenly left. The prince called after him when he was already in the
doorway:
“Be it known to you, sir, that I am not afraid of you in the least!”

He was highly vexed, made as if to sit down, but, having glanced at me,
did not. It was as if his glance was also saying to me, “Why are you also
sticking around?”
“Prince,” I tried to begin . . .
“I really have no time, Arkady Makarovich, I’m about to leave.”
“One moment, Prince, it’s very important to me; and, first of all, take
back your three hundred.”
“What’s this now?”
He was pacing, but he paused.
“It’s this, that after all that’s happened . . . and what you said about
Versilov, that he’s dishonorable, and, finally, your tone all the rest of the
time . . . In short, I simply can’t accept.”
“You’ve been accepting for a whole month, though.”
He suddenly sat down on a chair. I stood by the table, flipping through
Belinsky’s book with one hand and holding my hat with the other.
“The feelings were different, Prince . . . And, finally, I’d never have
brought it as far as a certain figure . . . This gambling . . . In short, I can’t!”
“You simply haven’t distinguished yourself in anything, and so you’re
frantic. I beg you to leave that book alone.”
“What does ‘haven’t distinguished yourself ’ mean? And, finally, you
almost put me on a par with Stebelkov in front of your guests.”
“Ah, there’s the answer!” he grinned caustically. “Besides, you were
embarrassed that Darzan called you ‘prince.’”
He laughed maliciously. I flared up:

“I don’t even understand . . . I wouldn’t take your princehood gratis . . .”
“I know your character. It was ridiculous the way you cried out in
defense of Mme. Akhmakov . . . Leave the book alone!”
“What does that mean?” I also shouted.
“Le-e-eave the book alo-o-one!” he suddenly yelled, sitting up fiercely in
his armchair, as if ready to charge.
“This goes beyond all limits,” I said and quickly left the room. But before
I reached the end of the hall, he called out to me from the door of the study:
“Come back, Arkady Makarovich! Come ba-a-ack! Come ba-a-ack right
now!”
I paid no attention and walked on. He quickly overtook me, seized my
arm, and dragged me back to the study. I didn’t resist!
“Take it!” he said, pale with agitation, handing me the three hundred
roubles I had left there. “You absolutely must take it . . . otherwise we . . .
you absolutely must!”
“How can I take it, Prince?”
“Well, I’ll ask your forgiveness, shall I? Well, forgive me! . . .”
“Prince, I always loved you, and if you also . . .”
“I also; take it . . .”
I took it. His lips were trembling.
“I understand, Prince, that you were infuriated by this scoundrel . . . but I
won’t take it, Prince, unless we kiss each other, as with previous quarrels . .
.”
I was also trembling as I said it.

“Well, what softheartedness,” the prince murmured with an embarrassed
smile, but he leaned over and kissed me. I shuddered: in his face, at the
moment of the kiss, I could decidedly read disgust.
“Did he at least bring you the money? . . .”
“Eh, it makes no difference.”
“It’s for you that I . . .”
“He did, he did.”
“Prince, we used to be friends . . . and, finally, Versilov . . .”
“Well, yes, yes, all right!”
“And, finally, I really don’t know ultimately, this three hundred . . .”
I was holding it in my hands.
“Take it, ta-a-ake it!” he smiled again, but there was something very
unkind in his smile.
I took it.

Chapter Three
I
I TOOK IT because I loved him. To whoever doesn’t believe it, I’ll reply
that at least at the moment when I took this money from him, I was firmly
convinced that, if I had wanted to, I could very well have gotten it from
another source. And therefore it means that I took it not out of extremity,
but out of delicacy, only so as not to offend him. Alas, that was how I
reasoned then! But even so I felt very oppressed on leaving him: I had seen
an extraordinary change towards me that morning; there had never yet been
such a tone; and against Versilov there was positive rebellion. Stebelkov, of
course, had vexed him greatly with something earlier, but he had started
even before Stebelkov. I’ll repeat once more: it had been possible to notice
a change compared with the beginning in all those recent days, but not like
that, not to such a degree—that’s the main thing.
The stupid news about this imperial aide-de-camp Baron Bjoring might
have had an influence as well . . . I also left in agitation, but . . . That’s just
it, that something quite different was shining then, and I let so much pass
before my eyes light-mindedly: I hastened to let it pass, I drove away all
that was gloomy and turned to what was shining . . .
It was not yet one in the afternoon. From the prince, my Matvei drove me
straight—will you believe to whom?—to Stebelkov! That’s just it, that
earlier that day he had surprised me not so much by his calling on the prince
(because he had promised him to come), as by the fact that, though he
winked at me out of his stupid habit, it was not at all on the subject I had
expected. The evening before, I had received from him, through the city
mail, a note I found quite mysterious, in which he urgently requested that I
visit him precisely today, between one and two o’clock, and “that he could
inform me of things I was not expecting.” And yet just now, there at the
prince’s, he hadn’t let anything show about the letter. What secrets could

there be between Stebelkov and me? The idea was even ridiculous; but in
view of everything that had happened, as I was going to him now, I even
felt a little excited. Of course, I turned to him for money once a couple of
weeks before, and he was about to give it, but for some reason we had a
falling-out then, and I didn’t take it; he began muttering something vaguely
then, as he usually does, and it seemed to me that he wanted to offer
something, some special conditions; and since I treated him with decided
condescension each time I met him at the prince’s, I proudly cut off any
thought of special conditions and left, despite the fact that he chased after
me to the door. That time I borrowed from the prince.
Stebelkov lived completely by himself, and lived prosperously: an
apartment of four splendid rooms, fine furniture, male and female servants,
and some sort of housekeeper, rather elderly, however. I came in wrathfully.
“Listen, my dear fellow,” I began from the doorway, “what, first of all, is
the meaning of this note? I don’t allow for any correspondence between
myself and you. And why didn’t you tell me what you wanted to earlier,
right there at the prince’s? I was at your service.”
“And why did you also keep silent earlier and not ask?” he extended his
mouth into a most self-satisfied smile.
“Because it’s not I who have need of you, but you who have need of me,”
I cried, suddenly getting angry.
“Then why have you come to me, in that case?” he nearly jumped up and
down with pleasure. I turned instantly and was about to leave, but he seized
me by the shoulder.
“No, no, I was joking. It’s an important matter; you’ll see for yourself.”
I sat down. I confess I was curious. We were sitting by the edge of a big
writing table, facing each other. He smiled slyly and raised his finger.
“Please, without your sly tricks and without the finger, and above all
without any allegories, but straight to business—otherwise I’m leaving!” I

cried again in wrath.
“You’re . . . proud!” he pronounced with some sort of stupid reproach,
swinging himself towards me in his armchair and raising all the wrinkles on
his forehead.
“One has to be with you!”
“You . . . took money from the prince today, three hundred roubles. I
have money. My money’s better.”
“How do you know I took money?” I was terribly surprised. “Can he
have told you that himself ?”
“He told me. Don’t worry, it was just so, side talk, it came up by the way,
only just by the way, not on purpose. He told me. But it was possible not to
take it from him. Is that so or not?”
“But I hear you fleece people at an unbearable rate.”
“I have a mont-de-piété, but I don’t fleece. I keep it only for friends, I
don’t lend to others. For others the mont-de-piété . . .”
This mont-de-piété was the most ordinary lending of money on pledges,
under some other name, in a different apartment, and it was flourishing.
“But I lend large sums to friends.”
“What, is the prince such a friend of yours?”
“A frie-e-end; but . . . he talks through his hat. And he dare not talk
through his hat.”
“Why, is he so much in your hands? Does he owe a lot?”
“He . . . owes a lot.”
“He’ll pay you back; he’s come into an inheritance . . .”

“That’s not his inheritance. He owes me money, and he owes me other
things. The inheritance isn’t enough. I’ll lend to you without interest.”
“Also as ‘to a friend’? How have I deserved it?” I laughed.
“You will deserve it.” He again thrust his whole body towards me and
was about to raise his finger.
“Stebelkov! No fingers, or else I leave.”
“Listen . . . he may marry Anna Andreevna!” And he squinted his left eye
infernally.
“Listen here, Stebelkov, the conversation is taking on such a scandalous
character . . . How dare you mention the name of Anna Andreevna?”
“Don’t be angry.”
“I’m only listening unwillingly, because I clearly see some sort of trick
here and want to find out . . . But I may lose control, Stebelkov!”
“Don’t be angry, don’t be proud. Don’t be proud for a little while and
listen; then you can be proud again. You do know about Anna Andreevna?
That the prince may marry her . . . you do know?”
“I’ve heard about this idea, of course, and I know everything, but I’ve
never said anything to the prince about this idea. I only know that this idea
was born in the mind of old Prince Sokolsky, who is still sick; but I’ve
never said anything or taken part in anything. As I’m telling you that solely
by way of explanation, I’ll allow myself to ask you, first: what made you
start talking with me about this? And, second, can it be that the prince talks
about such things with you?”
“He doesn’t talk with me; he doesn’t want to talk with me, but I talk with
him, and he doesn’t want to listen. He started yelling earlier.”
“What else! I approve of him.”

“Prince Sokolsky, the little old man, will give a big dowry with Anna
Andreevna. She pleases him. Then Prince Sokolsky the suitor will pay me
back all the money. And the non-money debt as well. He’s sure to! But now
he has no means to pay it back.”
“But me, what do you need me for?”
“For the main question: you’re an acquaintance; you know everybody
there. You can find everything out.”
“Ah, the devil . . . find what out?”
“Whether the prince wants it, whether Anna Andreevna wants it, whether
the old prince wants it. Find out for certain.”
“And you dare suggest that I be your spy, and do it for money!” I cried in
indignation.
“Don’t be proud, don’t be proud. For just a little longer, don’t be proud,
for another five minutes.” He sat me down again. He was evidently not
afraid of my gestures and exclamations; but I decided to listen to the end.
“I need to find out soon, very soon, because . . . because soon it may be
too late. Did you see how he ate the pill earlier, when the officer began
talking about the baron and Mme. Akhmakov?”
It was decidedly humiliating to listen further, but my curiosity was
invincibly enticed.
“Listen, you . . . you worthless man!” I said resolutely. “If I sit here and
listen and allow you to speak of such persons . . . and even answer you
myself, it’s not at all because I allow you that right. I simply see some sort
of meanness . . . And, first of all, what hopes can the prince have regarding
Katerina Nikolaevna?”
“None, but he’s frantic.”

“That’s not true.”
“Frantic. Which means that Mme. Akhmakov is now—a pass. He’s lost a
trick here. Now he’s only got Anna Andreevna. I’ll give you two thousand .
. . with no interest and no promissory note.”
Having said this, he leaned back resolutely and importantly in his chair
and goggled his eyes at me. I was also all eyes.
“Your suit comes from Bolshaya Millionnaya;19 you need money, money;
my money’s better than his. I’ll give you more than two thousand.”
“But what for? What for, devil take it?”
I stamped my foot. He leaned towards me and said expressively:
“So that you won’t interfere.”
“But it’s no concern of mine anyway,” I cried.
“I know you’re keeping quiet. That’s good.”
“I don’t need your approval. For my own part, I very much wish for it,
but I consider that it’s none of my business, and that it would even be
indecent of me.”
“You see, you see—indecent!” he raised his finger.
“See what?”
“Indecent . . . Heh!” and he suddenly laughed. “I understand, I
understand that it’s indecent for you, but . . . you’re not going to interfere?”
he winked, but in this winking there was something so insolent, even
jeering, base! He precisely supposed some sort of baseness in me and was
counting on that baseness . . . That was clear, but I still didn’t understand
what it was about.
“Anna Andreevna is also your sister, sir,” he uttered imposingly.

“Don’t you dare speak of that. And generally don’t you dare speak of
Anna Andreevna.”
“Don’t be proud, just for one more little minute! Listen: he’ll get the
money and provide for everybody,” Stebelkov said weightily, “everybody,
everybody, you follow?”
“So you think I’ll take money from him?”
“Aren’t you taking it now?”
“I’m taking my own!”
“What’s your own?”
“This is Versilov’s money; he owes Versilov twenty thousand.”
“Versilov, not you.”
“Versilov’s my father.”
“No, you’re Dolgoruky, not Versilov.”
“That makes no difference!”
Indeed, I was able to reason like that then. I knew it made a difference, I
wasn’t so stupid, but I reasoned like that then, again, out of “delicacy.”
“Enough!” I cried. “I understand precisely nothing. And how dared you
summon me for such trifles?”
“Can it be you really don’t understand? Are you doing it on purpose or
not?” Stebelkov said slowly, staring at me piercingly and with some sort of
mistrustful smile.
“By God, I don’t!”

“I say he can provide for everybody, everybody, only don’t interfere and
don’t talk him out of it . . .”
“You must have lost your mind! What’s this ‘everybody’ you keep
trotting out? Is it Versilov he’ll provide for?”
“You’re not the only one in it, nor is Versilov . . . there are others. And
Anna Andreevna is as much a sister to you as Lizaveta Makarovna!”
I stared at him goggle-eyed. Suddenly something like pity for me flashed
in his vile gaze:
“You don’t understand, and so much the better! It’s good, it’s very good
that you don’t understand. It’s praiseworthy . . . if you really don’t
understand.”
I became completely furious:
“Away with you and your trifles, you crazy man!” I cried, seizing my hat.
“They’re not trifles! So it’s a deal? But, you know, you’ll come again.”
“No,” I snapped from the doorway.
“You’ll come, and then . . . then there’ll be a different talk. That will be
the main talk. Two thousand, remember!”

II
HE MADE SUCH a filthy and murky impression on me that, going out, I
even tried not to think of it and only spat. The idea that the prince could
speak with him about me and this money pricked me as if with a pin. “I’ll
win and pay him back today,” I thought resolutely.
Stupid and tongue-tied as Stebelkov was, I had seen a blazing scoundrel
in all his splendor, and, above all, there certainly was some intrigue here.
Only I had no time to go into any intrigues, and that was the main reason

for my hen-blindness! I glanced worriedly at my watch, but it wasn’t even
two yet; that meant I could still make one visit, otherwise I’d have died of
excitement before three o’clock. I drove to see Anna Andreevna Versilov,
my sister. I had long ago become close with her at my little old prince’s,
precisely during his illness. The thought that I hadn’t seen him for three or
four days now nagged at my conscience, but it was precisely Anna
Andreevna who helped me out: the prince was extremely taken with her
and, to me, even called her his guardian angel. Incidentally, the thought of
marrying her to Prince Sergei Petrovich had indeed been born in the old
man’s head, and he had even told me of it more than once, in secret, of
course. I had conveyed this idea to Versilov, having noticed before that, for
all the essential things to which Versilov was so indifferent, nevertheless he
was always somehow especially interested when I told him something
about my meetings with Anna Andreevna. Versilov had muttered to me then
that Anna Andreevna was all too intelligent and, in such a ticklish matter,
could do without other people’s advice. Naturally, Stebelkov was right that
the old man would give her a dowry, but how could he dare to count on
anything here? Today the prince had shouted after him that he wasn’t afraid
of him at all. Had Stebelkov indeed talked with him in his study about Anna
Andreevna? I can imagine how infuriated I’d have been in his place.
Lately I had even been at Anna Andreevna’s quite often. But here one
strange thing always happened: it was always she herself who invited me to
come, and she certainly always expected me, but when I entered, she
unfailingly made it seem that I had come unexpectedly and unintendedly. I
noticed this feature in her, but I became attached to her all the same. She
lived with Mme. Fanariotov, her grandmother, as her ward, of course
(Versilov gave nothing to provide for them)—but in a far different role from
that in which wards are usually described in the houses of aristocratic
ladies, for instance, the old countess’s ward in Pushkin’s “Queen of
Spades.”20 Anna Andreevna was like a countess herself. She lived
completely separately in this house, that is, on the same floor and in the
same apartment as the Fanariotovs, but in two separate rooms, so that, for
instance, coming and going, I never once met any of the Fanariotovs. She
had the right to receive whomever she wanted, and to use her time however
she liked. True, she was already going on twenty-three. During the last year,

she had almost stopped appearing in society, though Mme. Fanariotov did
not stint on expenses for her granddaughter, whom, as I heard, she loved
very much. On the contrary, I precisely liked in Anna Andreevna the fact
that I always found her in such modest dresses, always busy with
something, with a book or handwork. There was something of the nunnery,
almost nunlike, in the way she looked, and I liked that. She was not
loquacious, but always spoke with weight, and was terribly good at
listening, something I never knew how to do. When I told her that, though
they didn’t have a single feature in common, she nevertheless bore a great
resemblance to Versilov, she always blushed slightly. She blushed often and
always quickly, but always only slightly, and I came to like very much this
particularity of her face. With her I never called Versilov by his last name,
but always Andrei Petrovich, and that came about somehow by itself. I even
noticed very well that, generally, at the Fanariotovs’, they must have been
somehow ashamed of Versilov; I noticed it, however, from Anna Andreevna
alone, though once again I don’t know if one can use the word “ashamed”
here; anyhow, there was something of the sort. I also talked to her about
Prince Sergei Petrovich, and she listened very much and, it seemed to me,
was interested in this information; but somehow it always happened that I
told her things myself, while she never asked. Of the possibility of a
marriage between them, I never dared to speak with her, though I often
wished to, because I partly liked the idea myself. But in her room I stopped
somehow venturing to talk about terribly many things, and, on the contrary,
I found it terribly good to be in her room. I also liked it very much that she
was very educated and had read a lot, and even serious books; she had read
much more than I had.
She herself invited me to come the first time. I understood even then that
she was maybe counting on occasionally worming a thing or two out of me.
Oh, many people could have wormed a great many things out of me then!
“But what of it,” I thought, “she’s not receiving me for that alone.” In short,
I was even glad that I could be of use to her, and . . . and when I sat with
her, it aways seemed to me within myself that it was my sister sitting near
me, though, incidentally, we never once spoke of our relation to each other,
not a word, not a hint, as if it simply didn’t exist. Sitting at her place, it
seemed to me somehow quite unthinkable to start talking about it, and,

really, looking at her, an absurd thought sometimes came to my head, that
she maybe didn’t know about this relation at all—so far as the way she
behaved with me went.

III
ON ENTERING, I suddenly found Liza with her. It almost struck me. I was
very well aware that they had seen each other before; it had happened at the
“nursing baby’s.” I may tell later, if there’s space, about this fantasy of the
proud and modest Anna Andreevna’s to see this baby, and about her
meeting Liza there; but all the same I never expected that Anna Andreevna
would ever invite Liza to her place. This struck me pleasantly. Not letting it
show, naturally, I greeted Anna Andreevna and, warmly pressing Liza’s
hand, sat down beside her. The two women were busy with work: on the
table and on their knees lay an evening dress of Anna Andreevna’s,
expensive but old, that is, worn three times, which she wanted to alter
somehow. Liza was a great “expert ” in such matters and had taste, and so a
solemn council of “wise women” was taking place. I remembered Versilov
and laughed; and anyhow I was in the most radiant spirits.
“You’re very cheerful today, and that’s very pleasant,” said Anna
Andreevna, articulating the words imposingly and distinctly. Her voice was
a dense and sonorous contralto, but she always spoke calmly and softly,
always lowering her long lashes slightly, and with a smile barely flitting
over her pale face.
“Liza knows how unpleasant I am when I’m not cheerful,” I replied
cheerfully.
“Maybe Anna Andreevna knows about that, too,” the mischievous Liza
needled me. The dear! If only I had known what was in her heart then!
“What are you doing now?” asked Anna Andreevna. (I’ll note that she
had precisely even asked me to call on her today.)

“I’m now sitting here and asking myself: why is it always more pleasant
for me to find you over a book than over handwork? No, really, handwork
doesn’t suit you for some reason. In that sense I take after Andrei
Petrovich.”
“You still haven’t made up your mind to enter the university?”
“I’m only too grateful that you haven’t forgotten our conversations; that
means you think of me occasionally; but . . . I haven’t formed my idea yet
concerning the university, and besides I have goals of my own.”
“That is, he has his secret,” observed Liza.
“Drop your jokes, Liza. A certain intelligent man said the other day that,
with all this progressive movement of ours in the last twenty years, we’ve
proved first of all that we’re filthily uneducated. Here, of course, he was
also speaking of our university men.”
“Well, surely papa said that; you repeat his thoughts terribly often,”
observed Liza.
“Liza, it’s as if you don’t believe I have a mind of my own.”
“In our time it’s useful to listen to the words of intelligent people and
remember them,” Anna Andreevna defended me a little.
“Precisely, Anna Andreevna,” I picked up hotly. “Whoever doesn’t think
about Russia’s present moment is not a citizen! Maybe I look at Russia
from a strange viewpoint: we lived through the Tartar invasion, then
through two centuries of slavery,21 and that, certainly, because both the one
and the other were to our liking. Now we’ve been given freedom, and we
have to endure freedom. Will we be able to? Will freedom prove as much to
our taste? That’s the question.”
Liza glanced quickly at Anna Andreevna, who looked down at once and
began searching for something around her; I saw that Liza was trying as

hard as she could to control herself, but somehow accidentally our eyes
suddenly met, and she burst out laughing. I flared up:
“Liza, you’re inconceivable!”
“Forgive me!” she said suddenly, ceasing to laugh and almost with
sadness. “I’ve got God knows what in my head . . .”
And it was as if tears suddenly trembled in her voice. I felt terribly
ashamed; I took her hand and kissed it hard.
“You’re very kind,” Anna Andreevna observed to me softly, seeing me
kiss Liza’s hand.
“I’m glad most of all, Liza, that I find you laughing this time,” I said.
“Would you believe it, Anna Andreevna, these past few days she met me
each time with some strange look, and in this look there was as if a
question: ‘So, have you found anything out? Is everything going well?’
Really, there’s something like that with her.”
Anna Andreevna gave her a slow and keen look. Liza dropped her eyes. I
could see very well, however, that the two were much better and more
closely acquainted than I’d have supposed when I came in earlier. The
thought pleased me.
“You just said I was kind; you won’t believe how the whole of me
changes for the better with you, and how pleasant it is for me to be with
you, Anna Andreevna,” I said with feeling.
“And I’m very glad you say that to me precisely now,” she replied
meaningly. I must say that she never talked to me about my disorderly life
and of the abyss I had plunged into, though I knew she not only knew about
it all, but even made inquiries indirectly. So that now it was like a first hint,
and—my heart turned to her still more.
“How’s our invalid?” I asked.

“Oh, he’s much better. He’s walking, and he went for a ride yesterday
and today. But didn’t you go to see him today either? He’s waiting so much
for you.”
“I’m guilty towards him, but you visit him now and have fully replaced
me. He’s a great traitor and has exchanged me for you.”
She made a very serious face, very possibly because my joke was trivial.
“I was at Prince Sergei Petrovich’s today,” I began to mutter, “and I . . .
By the way, Liza, did you go to see Darya Onisimovna today?”
“Yes, I did,” she answered somehow curtly, not raising her head. “It
seems you go to see the sick prince every day?” she asked somehow
suddenly, maybe in order to say something.
“Yes, I go to see him, only I don’t get there,” I smiled. “I go in and turn
left.”
“Even the prince has noticed that you go to see Katerina Nikolaevna very
often. He mentioned it yesterday and laughed,” said Anna Andreevna.
“At what? What did he laugh at?”
“He was joking, you know. He said that, on the contrary, a young and
beautiful woman always produces an impression of indignation and wrath
in a young man your age . . .” Anna Andreevna suddenly laughed.
“Listen . . . you know, that was a terribly apt remark he made,” I cried.
“Probably it wasn’t he, but you who said it to him?”
“Why so? No, it was he.”
“Well, but if this beauty pays attention to him, despite his being so
insignificant, standing in the corner, angry at being ‘little,’ and suddenly
prefers him to the whole crowd of surrounding admirers, what then?” I

asked suddenly, with a most bold and defiant look. My heart began to
pound.
“Then you’ll just perish right in front of her,” Liza laughed.
“Perish?” I cried. “No, I won’t perish. I don’t believe I’ll perish. If a
woman stands across my path, then she must follow after me. You don’t
block my path with impunity . . .”
Liza once said to me in passing, recalling it long afterwards, that I uttered
this phrase then terribly strangely, seriously, and as if suddenly growing
pensive; but at the same time “so ridiculously that it was impossible to
control oneself.” Indeed, Anna Andreevna again burst out laughing.
“Laugh, laugh at me!” I exclaimed in intoxication, because I was terribly
pleased with this whole conversation and the direction it had taken. “From
you it only gives me pleasure. I love your laughter, Anna Andreevna! You
have this feature: you keep silent and suddenly burst out laughing, instantly,
so that even an instant earlier one couldn’t have guessed it by your face. I
knew a lady in Moscow, distantly, I watched her from a corner. She was
almost as beautiful as you are, but she couldn’t laugh the way you do, and
her face, which was as attractive as yours—lost its attraction; but yours is
terribly attractive . . . precisely for that ability . . . I’ve long been wanting to
tell you.”
When I said of the lady that “she was as beautiful as you are,” I was
being clever: I pretended that it had escaped me accidentally, as if I hadn’t
even noticed; I knew very well that women value such “escaped” praise
more highly than any polished compliment you like. And much as Anna
Andreevna blushed, I knew it pleased her. And I invented the lady; I didn’t
know any such lady in Moscow, it was only so as to praise Anna Andreevna
and please her.
“One truly might think,” she said with a charming smile, “that you’ve
been under the influence of some beautiful woman recently.”

It was as if I were flying off somewhere . . . I even wanted to reveal
something to them . . . but I restrained myself.
“And by the way, not long ago you spoke of Katerina Nikolaevna quite
hostilely.”
“If I ever said anything bad,” I flashed my eyes, “the blame for it goes to
the monstrous slander against her that she was Andrei Petrovich’s enemy;
the slander against him, too, that he was supposedly in love with her, had
proposed to her, and similar absurdities. This idea is as outrageous as
another slander against her, that, supposedly while her husband was still
alive, she had promised Prince Sergei Petrovich that she would marry him
when she was widowed, and then didn’t keep her word. But I know
firsthand that all this wasn’t so, but was only a joke. I know it firsthand.
Abroad there, once, in a joking moment, she indeed told the prince
‘maybe,’ in the future; but what could it have signified besides just a light
word? I know only too well that the prince, for his part, cannot attach any
value to such a promise, and he has no intentions anyway,” I added,
catching myself. “He seems to have quite different ideas,” I put in slyly.
“Today Nashchokin said at his place that Katerina Nikolaevna is supposedly
going to marry Baron Bjoring: believe me, he bore this news in the best
possible way, you may be sure.”
“Nashchokin was there?” Anna Andreevna suddenly asked weightily and
as if in surprise.
“Oh, yes. He seems to be one of those respectable people . . .”
“And Nashchokin spoke with him about this marriage to Bjoring?” Anna
Andreevna suddenly became very interested.
“Not about the marriage, but just so, of the possibility, as a rumor; he said
there was supposedly such a rumor in society; as for me, I’m sure it’s
nonsense.”
Anna Andreevna pondered, and bent over her sewing.

“I like Prince Sergei Petrovich,” I suddenly added warmly. “He has his
shortcomings, indisputably, I’ve already told you—namely, a certain oneidea-ness—but his shortcomings also testify to a nobility of soul, isn’t it
true? Today, for instance, he and I nearly quarreled over an idea: his
conviction that if you speak about nobility, you should be noble yourself,
otherwise all you say is a lie. Well, is that logical? And yet it testifies to the
lofty demands of honor in his soul, of duty, of justice, isn’t it true? . . . Ah,
my God, what time is it?” I suddenly cried, happening to glance at the face
of the mantelpiece clock.
“Ten minutes to three,” she said calmly, glancing at the clock. All the
while I spoke of the prince, she listened to me, looking down with a sort of
sly but sweet smile: she knew why I was praising him so. Liza listened, her
head bent over her work, and for some time had not interfered in the
conversation.
I jumped up as if burnt.
“Are you late somewhere?”
“Yes . . . no . . . I am late, though, but I’ll go right now. Just one word,
Anna Andreevna,” I began excitedly, “I can’t help telling you today! I want
to confess to you that I’ve already blessed several times the kindness and
delicacy with which you have invited me to visit you . . . Being acquainted
with you has made a very strong impression on me. It’s as if here in your
room my soul is purified and I go away better than I am. It’s really so.
When I sit beside you, I not only can’t speak about bad things, but I can’t
even have bad thoughts; they disappear in your presence, and if I remember
something bad in your presence, I’m at once ashamed of this bad thing,
grow timid, and blush in my soul. And, you know, it was especially
pleasing to me to meet my sister here with you today . . . It testifies to such
nobility of your . . . to such a beautiful attitude . . . In short, it speaks for
something so brotherly, if you will allow me to break this ice, that I . . .”
As I spoke, she was rising from her seat, turning more and more red; but
it was as if she was suddenly frightened by something, by some line that

ought not to have been overleaped, and she quickly interrupted me:
“Believe me, I shall know how to appreciate your feelings with all my
heart . . . I understood them without words . . . and already long ago . . .”
She paused in embarrassment, pressing my hand. Suddenly Liza tugged
at my sleeve unobserved. I said good-bye and went out; but in the next
room Liza caught up with me.

IV
“LIZA, WHY DID you tug at my sleeve?” I asked.
“She’s nasty, she’s cunning, she’s not worth . . . She keeps you in order to
worm things out of you,” she whispered in a quick, spiteful whisper. I’d
never seen her with such a face before.
“Liza, God help you, she’s such a lovely girl!”
“Well, then I’m nasty.”
“What’s the matter with you?”
“I’m very bad. She’s maybe the loveliest of girls, but I’m bad. Enough,
drop it. Listen: mama asks you about something ‘that she doesn’t dare
speak of,’ as she said. Arkady, darling! Stop gambling, dear, I beseech you .
. . mama, too . . .”
“Liza, I know it myself, but . . . I know it’s a pathetic weakness, but . . .
it’s only trifles and nothing more! You see, I got into debt, like a fool, and I
want to win only so as to pay it back. It’s possible to win, because I played
without calculation, off the cuff, like a fool, but now I’ll tremble over each
rouble . . . I won’t be myself if I don’t win! I haven’t taken to it; it’s not the
main thing, it’s just in passing, I assure you! I’m too strong not to stop when
I want to. I’ll pay back the money, and then I’m yours undividedly, and tell
mama that I’ll never leave you . . .”

“Those three hundred roubles today cost you something!”
“How do you know?” I gave a start.
“Darya Onisimovna heard everything . . .”
But at that moment Liza suddenly pushed me behind the curtain, and the
two of us found ourselves in what’s known as a “lantern,” that is, a round,
bay-windowed little room. Before I managed to come to my senses, I heard
a familiar voice, the clank of spurs, and guessed at the familiar stride.
“Prince Seryozha,” I whispered.
“Himself,” she whispered.
“Why are you so frightened?”
“I just am. I don’t want him to meet me for anything . . .”
“Tiens, he’s not dangling after you, is he?” I grinned. “He’ll get it from
me if he is. Where are you going?”
“Let’s leave. I’ll go with you.”
“Did you say good-bye in there?”
“Yes, my coat’s in the front hall . . .”
We left. On the stairs an idea struck me:
“You know, Liza, he may have come to propose to her!”
“N-no . . . he won’t propose . . .” she said firmly and slowly, in a low
voice.
“You don’t know, Liza, I did quarrel with him today—since you’ve
already been told of it—but, by God, I love him sincerely and wish him
good luck here. We made peace today. When we’re happy, we’re so kind . .

. You see, he has many splendid inclinations . . . and humaneness . . . The
rudiments at least . . . and in the hands of such a firm and intelligent girl as
Miss Versilov, he’d straighten out completely and be happy. It’s too bad I
have no time . . . ride with me a little, I could tell you something . . .”
“No, ride alone, I’m not going that way. Will you come for dinner?”
“I’ll come, I’ll come, as promised. Listen, Liza, a certain rotter—in short,
the vilest of beings, well, Stebelkov, if you know him—has a terrible
influence on his affairs . . . promissory notes . . . well, in short, he’s got him
in his hands, and has him so cornered, and he feels so humiliated himself,
that the two of them see no other solution than to propose to Anna
Andreevna. She really ought to be warned. However, it’s nonsense, she’ll
set the whole matter to rights later. But will she refuse him? What do you
think?”
“Good-bye, I have no time,” Liza cut me off, and I suddenly saw so
much hatred in her fleeting glance that I at once cried out in fright:
“Liza, dear, why that look?”
“It’s not at you; only don’t gamble . . .”
“Ah, you mean gambling! I won’t, I won’t.”
“You just said, ‘when we’re happy’—so you’re very happy?”
“Terribly, Liza, terribly! My God, it’s already three o’clock, and past! . . .
Good-bye, Lizok. Lizochka, dear, tell me: can one keep a woman waiting?
Is that permissible?”
“At a rendezvous, you mean?” Liza smiled faintly, with some sort of
dead, trembling little smile.
“Give me your hand for luck.”
“For luck? My hand? Not for anything!”

And she quickly walked away. And, above all, she had cried out so
seriously. I jumped into my sledge.
Yes, yes, and this “happiness” was the main reason why I, like a blind
mole, neither understood nor saw anything except myself then!

Chapter Four
I
NOW I’M EVEN afraid to tell about it. It was all long ago; but now, too,
it’s like a mirage for me. How could such a woman arrange a rendezvous
with such a vile little brat as I was then?—that’s how it was at first sight!
When I left Liza and rushed off, my heart pounding, I thought I’d simply
lost my mind; the idea of an appointed rendezvous suddenly seemed to me
such a glaring absurdity that it was impossible to believe it. And yet I had
no doubts at all, even to this extent: the more glaring the absurdity, the more
strongly I believed in it.
That it had already struck three worried me: “If I’ve been granted a
rendezvous, how can I be late for the rendezvous?” I thought. Stupid
questions also flashed, such as, “Which is better for me now—boldness or
timidity?” But it all only flashed, because in my heart there was one main
thing, and such as I couldn’t define. What had been said the day before was
this: “Tomorrow at three o’clock I’ll be at Tatyana Pavlovna’s”—that was
all. But, first, she had always received me alone, in her room, and she could
have told me all she liked without moving to Tatyana Pavlovna’s; so why
appoint another place at Tatyana Pavlovna’s? And again a question: will
Tatyana Pavlovna be at home, or won’t she? If it’s a rendezvous, then it
means Tatyana Pavlovna won’t be at home. And how to accomplish that
without explaining it all to Tatyana Pavlovna beforehand? Which means
that Tatyana Pavlovna is also in on the secret? This thought seemed wild to
me and somehow unchaste, almost crude.
And, finally, she might simply have wanted to visit Tatyana Pavlovna and
told me yesterday without any purpose, and I imagined all sorts of things.
And it had been said so much in passing, carelessly, calmly, and after a
rather boring séance, because all the while I had been at her place yesterday,
I had been thrown off for some reason: I sat, mumbled, and didn’t know

what to say, grew terribly angry and timid, and she was going out
somewhere, as it turned out afterwards, and was visibly glad when I got up
to leave. All these considerations crowded in my head. I decided, finally,
that I would go, ring the bell, the cook would open the door, and I would
ask, “Is Tatyana Pavlovna at home?” If she wasn’t, it meant “rendezvous.”
But I had no doubts, no doubts!
I ran up the stairs and—on the stairs, in front of the door, all my fear
vanished. “Well, come what may,” I thought, “only quickly!” The cook
opened the door and, with her vile phlegm, grumbled that Tatyana Pavlovna
was not at home. “And is there anyone else waiting for Tatyana Pavlovna?”
I was about to ask, but didn’t. “Better see for myself,” and, muttering to the
cook that I would wait, I threw off my coat and opened the door . . .
Katerina Nikolaevna was sitting by the window and “waiting for Tatyana
Pavlovna.”
“She’s not here?” she suddenly asked me, as if with worry and vexation,
the moment she saw me. Both her voice and her face corresponded so little
with my expectations that I simply got mired on the threshold.
“Who’s not here?” I murmured.
“Tatyana Pavlovna! Didn’t I ask you yesterday to tell her I’d call on her
at three o’clock?”
“I . . . I haven’t seen her at all.”
“You forgot?”
I sat down as if crushed. So that’s how it turned out! And, above all,
everything was as clear as two times two, and I—I still stubbornly believed.
“I don’t even remember your asking me to tell her. And you didn’t; you
simply said you’d be here at three o’clock,” I cut her short impatiently. I
wasn’t looking at her.

“Ah!” she suddenly cried. “So, if you forgot to tell her, and yet knew
yourself that I would be here, so then what did you come here for?”
I raised my head. There was neither mockery nor wrath in her face, there
was only her bright, cheerful smile and some sort of additional
mischievousness in her expression—her perpetual expression, however—an
almost childlike mischievousness. “There, you see, I’ve caught you out.
Well, what are you going to say now?” her whole face all but said.
I didn’t want to answer, and again looked down. The silence lasted for
about half a minute.
“Are you just coming from papà?” she suddenly asked.
“I’m just coming from Anna Andreevna, and I wasn’t at Prince Nikolai
Ivanovich’s at all . . . and you knew that,” I suddenly added.
“Did anything happen to you at Anna Andreevna’s?”
“That is, since I now have such a crazy look? No, I had a crazy look even
before Anna Andreevna’s.”
“And you didn’t get smarter at her place?”
“No, I didn’t. Besides, I heard there that you were going to marry Baron
Bjoring.”
“Did she tell you that?” she suddenly became interested.
“No, I told her that, and I heard Nashchokin say it to Prince Sergei
Petrovich today when he came to visit.”
I still wouldn’t raise my eyes to her; to look at her meant to be showered
with light, joy, happiness, and I didn’t want to be happy. The sting of
indignation pierced my heart, and in a single instant I made a tremendous
decision. Then I suddenly began to speak, I scarcely remember what about.
I was breathless and mumbled somehow, but now I looked boldly at her.

My heart was pounding. I began talking about something totally unrelated,
though maybe it made sense. At first she listened with her steady, patient
smile, which never left her face, but, little by little, astonishment and then
even alarm flashed in her intent gaze. Her smile still didn’t leave her, but
the smile, too, as if trembled at times.
“What’s the matter?” I suddenly asked, noticing that she was all
atremble.
“I’m afraid of you,” she replied almost anxiously.
“Why don’t you leave? Look, since Tatyana Pavlovna isn’t here now, and
you knew she wouldn’t be, doesn’t that mean you should get up and leave?”
“I wanted to wait, but now . . . in fact . . .”
She made as if to rise.
“No, no, sit down,” I stopped her. “There, you just trembled again, but
you smile even when you’re afraid . . . You always have a smile. There,
now you’re smiling completely . . .”
“Are you raving?”
“Yes.”
“I’m afraid . . .” she whispered again.
“Of what?”
“That you’ll . . . start breaking down the walls . . .” She smiled again, but
this time indeed timidly.
“I can’t bear your smile! . . .”
And I started talking again. It was just as if I was flying. As if something
was pushing me. I had never, never talked with her like that, but always

timidly. I was terribly timid now, too, but I went on talking; I remember I
began talking about her face.
“I can’t bear your smile anymore!” I suddenly cried. “Why did I imagine
you as menacing, magnificent, and with sarcastic society phrases while I
was in Moscow? Yes, in Moscow; I talked about you with Marya Ivanovna
while I was still there, and we imagined you, how you must be . . . Do you
remember Marya Ivanovna? You visited her. As I was coming here, I
dreamed of you all night on the train. Before you arrived, I spent a whole
month here looking at your portrait in your father’s study, and guessed
nothing. The expression of your face is childlike mischievousness and
infinite simpleheartedness—there! I’ve marveled at that terribly all the
while I’ve been coming to see you. Oh, you know how to look proud and
crush one with your gaze. I remember how you looked at me at your
father’s when you came from Moscow then . . . I saw you then, and yet if I
had been asked then, when I left, what you were like—I wouldn’t have been
able to tell. I couldn’t even have said how tall you were. I saw you and just
went blind. Your portrait doesn’t resemble you at all: your eyes aren’t dark,
but light, and only seem dark because of your long lashes. You’re plump, of
average height, but your plumpness is firm, light, the plumpness of a
healthy young village girl. And you have a perfect village face, the face of a
village beauty—don’t be offended, it’s good, it’s better—a round, ruddy,
bright, bold, laughing, and . . . shy face! Really, it’s shy. The shy face of
Katerina Nikolaevna Akhmakov! Shy and chaste, I swear! More than chaste
—childlike!—that’s your face! I’ve been struck all this while, and all this
while I’ve asked myself: is this that woman? I know now that you’re very
intelligent, but in the beginning I thought you were a bit simple. Your mind
is gay, but without any embellishments . . . Another thing I like is that the
smile never leaves you; that’s my paradise! I also like your calmness, your
quietness, and that you articulate your words smoothly, calmly, and almost
lazily—I precisely like that laziness. It seems that if a bridge collapsed
under you, even then you’d say something smooth and measured . . . I
imagined you as the height of pride and passion, yet you’ve talked with me
these two whole months like student to student . . . I never imagined your
forehead was like that: it’s slightly low, as in statues, but it’s white and
delicate as marble under your fluffy hair. You have a high bosom, a light

step, you’re of extraordinary beauty, yet you have no pride at all. I’ve come
to believe it only now, I didn’t believe it before!”
She listened wide-eyed to this whole wild tirade; she saw that I was
trembling myself. She raised her gloved little hand several times in a sweet,
cautious gesture, so as to stop me, but each time withdrew it in perplexity
and fear. Now and then she even recoiled quickly with her whole body. Two
or three times a smile glimmered again on her face; one time she blushed
very much, but in the end she was decidedly frightened and began to turn
pale. As soon as I paused, she reached out her hand and said in a sort of
pleading but still smooth voice:
“You cannot speak like that . . . it’s impossible to speak like that . . .”
And she suddenly got up from her place, unhurriedly taking her scarf and
sable muff.
“You’re going?” I cried.
“I’m decidedly afraid of you . . . you abuse . . .” she drew out as if with
regret and reproach.
“Listen, by God, I won’t break down any walls.”
“But you’ve already started,” she couldn’t help herself and smiled. “I
don’t even know if you’ll let me pass.” And it seemed she truly was afraid
that I wouldn’t let her go.
“I’ll open the door for you myself, you can go, but know this: I’ve made
a tremendous decision; and if you want to give light to my soul, come back,
sit down, and listen to just two words. But if you don’t want to, then go, and
I myself will open the door for you.”
She looked at me and sat down.
“With what indignation another woman would have left, but you sat
down!” I cried in ecstasy.

“You never allowed yourself to talk like this before.”
“I was always timid before. Now, too, I walked in not knowing what to
say. Do you think I don’t feel timid now? I do. But I suddenly made a
tremendous decision, and I feel I’ll carry it out. And as soon as I made this
decision, I lost my mind at once and began saying all that . . . Listen, here
are my two words: am I your spy or not? Answer me—there’s the
question!”
Color quickly poured over her face.
“Don’t answer yet, Katerina Nikolaevna, but listen to everything and then
tell me the whole truth.”
I broke all the barriers at once and flew off into space.

II
“TWO MONTHS AGO I stood here behind the curtain . . . you know . . .
and you were talking with Tatyana Pavlovna about the letter. I ran out,
beside myself, and said too much. You knew at once that I knew something
. . . you couldn’t help understanding . . . you were looking for an important
document and were apprehensive about it . . . Wait, Katerina Nikolaevna,
hold off from speaking yet. I declare to you that there were grounds for
your suspicions: this document exists . . . that is, it did . . . I saw it; it’s your
letter to Andronikov, right?”
“You saw that letter?” she asked quickly, embarrassed and agitated.
“Where did you see it?”
“I saw it . . . I saw it at Kraft’s . . . the one who shot himself . . .”
“Really? You saw it yourself? What happened to it?”
“Kraft tore it up.”
“In your presence? You saw it?”

“In my presence. He tore it up, probably, before his death . . . I didn’t
know then that he was going to shoot himself . . .”
“So it’s destroyed, thank God!” she said slowly, with a sigh, and crossed
herself.
I didn’t lie to her. That is, I did lie, because the document was with me
and had never been with Kraft, but that was merely a detail, while in the
main thing I didn’t lie, because the moment I lied, I promised myself to
burn the letter that very evening. I swear, if I’d had it in my pocket at that
moment, I’d have taken it out and given it to her; but I didn’t have it with
me, it was at home. However, maybe I wouldn’t have given it to her,
because I would have been very ashamed to confess to her then that I had it
and that I had been watching her for so long, waiting and not giving it to
her. It’s all one: I’d have burned it at home in any case, and I wasn’t lying! I
was pure at that moment, I swear.
“And if so,” I went on, almost beside myself, “then tell me, did you
attract me, treat me nicely, receive me, because you suspected I had
knowledge of the document? Wait, Katerina Nikolaevna, don’t speak for
one more little minute, but let me finish everything. All the while I’ve been
visiting you, all this time I’ve suspected that you were being nice to me
only in order to coax this letter out of me, to drive me to a point where I’d
confess . . . Wait one more minute: I suspected, but I suffered. Your
duplicity was unbearable for me, because . . . because in you I found the
noblest of beings! I’ll say it straight out, straight out: I was your enemy, but
in you I found the noblest of beings! Everything was vanquished at once.
But the duplicity, that is, the suspicion of duplicity, tormented me . . . Now
everything must be resolved, must be explained, the time has come; but
wait a little more, don’t speak, learn how I myself look at all this, precisely
now, at the present moment. I’ll say it straight out: even if it was so, I won’t
be angry . . . that is, I meant to say—won’t be offended, because it’s all so
natural, I do understand. What could be unnatural and bad here? You’re
suffering over a letter, you suspect that so-and-so knows everything, why,
then you might very well wish that so-and-so would speak . . . There’s
nothing bad in that, nothing at all. I say it sincerely. But all the same I need

you to tell me something now . . . to confess (forgive me the word). I need
the truth. For some reason I need it! And so, tell me, were you being nice to
me just to coax the document out of me . . . Katerina Nikolaevna!”
I spoke as if I were plunging down, and my forehead was burning. She
listened to me without alarm now; on the contrary, there was feeling in her
face, but she looked somehow shy, as if ashamed.
“Just for that,” she said slowly and softly. “Forgive me, I was to blame,”
she suddenly added, raising her hands towards me slightly. I had never
expected that. I had expected anything but those words, even from her
whom I already knew.
“And you say to me, ‘I’m to blame!’ Straight out like that: ‘I’m to
blame!’” I cried.
“Oh, long ago I began to feel that I was to blame before you . . . and I’m
even glad that it’s come out now . . .”
“Felt it long ago? Why didn’t you say so sooner?”
“I didn’t know how to say it,” she smiled. “That is, I did know,” she
smiled again, “but I somehow came to feel ashamed . . . because, actually,
in the beginning I ‘attracted’ you, as you put it, only for that, but then very
soon it became disgusting to me . . . and I was tired of all this pretending, I
assure you!” she added with bitter feeling. “And of all this fuss as well!”
“And why, why wouldn’t you ask then in a direct way? You should have
said, ‘You know about the letter, why are you pretending?’ And I’d have
told you everything at once, I’d have confessed at once!”
“I was . . . a little afraid of you. I confess, I also didn’t trust you. And it’s
true: if I was sly, you were, too,” she added with a smile.
“Yes, yes, I was unworthy!” I cried, astounded. “Oh, you don’t know yet
all the abysses of my fall!”

“Well, now it’s abysses! I recognize your style.” She smiled quietly.
“That letter,” she added sadly, “was the saddest and most thoughtless act of
my life. The awareness of that act has always been a reproach to me. Under
the influence of circumstances and apprehensions, I doubted my dear,
magnanimous father. Knowing that this letter might fall . . . into the hands
of wicked people . . . having all the grounds for thinking so,” she added
hotly, “I trembled for fear they might make use of it, show it to papà . . .
and it might make an extreme impression on him . . . in his state . . . on his
health . . . and he would stop loving me . . . Yes,” she added, looking
brightly into my eyes and probably catching something in my gaze, “yes, I
also feared for my own lot: I feared that he . . . under the influence of his
illness . . . might also deprive me of his favor . . . That feeling was also part
of it, but here I’m probably to blame before him, too: he’s so kind and
magnanimous that he would of course have forgiven me. That’s all there
was. But the way I acted with you—that should not have happened,” she
concluded, suddenly abashed again. “You make me feel ashamed.”
“No, you have nothing to be ashamed of !” I cried.
“I was actually counting . . . on your ardor . . . and I admit it,” she said,
lowering her eyes.
“Katerina Nikolaevna! Who, tell me, who is forcing you to make such
confessions to me aloud?” I cried as if drunk. “Well, what would it have
cost you to stand up and prove to me, like two times two, in the choicest
expressions and in the subtlest way, that while it did happen, all the same it
didn’t happen—you understand, the way you people in high society know
how to manage the truth? I’m crude and stupid, I’d have believed you at
once, I’d have believed anything you said! It wouldn’t have cost you
anything to do that, would it? You’re not really afraid of me! How could
you have humiliated yourself so willingly before an upstart, before a
pathetic adolescent?”
“In this at least I haven’t humiliated myself before you,” she uttered with
extreme dignity, evidently not understanding my exclamation.

“Oh, on the contrary, on the contrary! That’s just what I’m shouting! . . .”
“Ah, it was so bad and so thoughtless on my part!” she exclaimed, raising
her hand to her face and as if trying to cover herself with it. “I was already
ashamed yesterday, that’s why I was so out of sorts when you were sitting
with me . . . The whole truth is,” she added, “that my circumstances have
now come together in such a way that I absolutely needed, finally, to know
the whole truth about the fate of that unfortunate letter, otherwise I had
already begun to forget about it . . . because I didn’t receive you only on
account of that,” she added suddenly.
My heart trembled.
“Of course not,” she smiled with a subtle smile, “of course not! I . . . You
remarked on it very aptly earlier, Arkady Makarovich, that you and I often
talked as student to student. I assure you that I’m sometimes very bored
with people; it has become especially so after the trip abroad and all those
family misfortunes . . . I even go out very little now, and not only from
laziness. I often want to leave for the country. I could reread my favorite
books there, which I set aside long ago, otherwise I can’t find time to read
them. Remember, you laughed that I read Russian newspapers, two
newspapers a day?”
“I didn’t laugh . . .”
“Of course, because it stirred you in the same way, but I confessed to you
long ago: I’m Russian, and I love Russia. You remember, we kept reading
the ‘facts,’ as you called them” (she smiled). “Though very often you’re
somehow . . . strange, yet you sometimes became so animated that you were
always able to say an apt word, and you were interested in precisely what
interested me. When you’re a ‘student,’ you really are sweet and original.
But other roles seem little suited to you,” she added with a lovely, sly smile.
“You remember, we sometimes spent whole hours talking about nothing but
figures, counting and estimating, concerned about the number of schools we
have and where education is headed. We counted up the murders and
criminal cases, made comparisons with the good news . . . wanted to know

where it was all going and what, finally, would happen with us ourselves. I
met with sincerity in you. In society they never talk with us women like
that. Last week I tried to talk with Prince ——v about Bismarck, because it
interested me very much, but I couldn’t make up my own mind, and,
imagine, he sat down beside me and began telling me, even in great detail,
but all of it with some sort of irony, and precisely with that condescension I
find so unbearable, with which ‘great men’ usually speak to us women
when we meddle in what is ‘not our business’ . . . And do you remember
how you and I nearly quarreled over Bismarck? You were proving to me
that you had an idea of your own that went ‘way beyond’ Bismarck’s,” she
suddenly laughed. “I’ve met only two people in my life who have talked
quite seriously with me: my late husband, a very, very intelligent and . . .
noble man,” she said imposingly, “and then—you yourself know who . . .”
“Versilov!” I cried. I held my breath at each word she said.
“Yes. I liked very much to listen to him, and in the end I became fully . . .
perhaps overly candid with him, but it was then that he didn’t believe me!”
“Didn’t believe you!”
“Yes, but then nobody ever believed me.”
“But Versilov! Versilov!”
“It’s not simply that he didn’t believe me,” she said, lowering her eyes
and smiling somehow strangely, “but he decided that I had ‘all vices’ in
me.”
“Of which you don’t have a single one!”
“No, I do have some.”
“Versilov didn’t love you, that’s why he didn’t understand you,” I cried,
flashing my eyes.
Something twitched in her face.

“Drop that and never speak to me of . . . that man . . .” she added hotly
and with strong emphasis. “But enough; it’s time to go.” (She got up to
leave.) “So, do you forgive me or not?” she said, looking at me brightly.
“Me . . . forgive . . . you! Listen, Katerina Nikolaevna, and don’t be
angry! Is it true that you’re getting married?”
“That’s not at all decided yet,” she said, as if afraid of something, with
embarrassment.
“Is he a good man? Forgive me, forgive me the question!”
“Yes, very good . . .”
“Don’t answer any more, don’t deign to answer me! I know that such
questions are impossible from me! I only wanted to know whether he’s
worthy or not, but I’ll find out about him myself.”
“Ah, listen!” she said in alarm.
“No, I won’t, I won’t. I’ll pass by . . . But I’ll only say this: may God
grant you every happiness, every one that you choose . . . for having given
me so much happiness now, in this one hour! You are now imprinted on my
soul forever. I have acquired a treasure: the thought of your perfection. I
suspected perfidy, coarse coquetry, and I was unhappy . . . because I
couldn’t connect that notion with you . . . during these last days I’ve been
thinking day and night; and suddenly it all becomes clear as day! Coming in
here, I thought I’d go away with Jesuitism, cunning, a worming-out serpent,
but I found honor, glory, a student! . . . You laugh? Go on, go on! But
you’re a saint, you can’t laugh at what is sacred . . .”
“Oh, no, I’m only laughing that you use such terrible words . . . Well,
what is a ‘worming-out serpent’?” she laughed.
“You let drop one precious word today,” I went on in rapture. “How
could you possibly say in front of me ‘that you were counting on my
ardor’? Well, so you’re a saint and confess even to that, because you

imagined some sort of guilt in yourself and wanted to punish yourself . . .
Though, incidentally, there wasn’t any guilt, because even if there was,
everything that comes from you is holy! But still you might not have said
precisely that word, that expression! . . . Such even unnatural candor only
shows your lofty chastity, your respect for me, your faith in me,” I
exclaimed incoherently. “Oh, don’t blush, don’t blush! . . . And who, who
could slander and say that you are a passionate woman? Oh, forgive me, I
see a pained expression on your face, forgive the frenzied adolescent his
clumsy words! As if it were a matter of words and expressions now? Aren’t
you higher than all expressions? . . . Versilov once said that Othello killed
Desdemona and then himself not because he was jealous, but because his
ideal was taken from him . . . I understood that, because today my ideal has
been given back to me!”
“You praise me too much: I’m not worthy of it,” she said with feeling.
“Do you remember what I said to you about your eyes?” she said jokingly.
“That I don’t have eyes, but two microscopes instead, and that I
exaggerate every fly into a camel! No, ma’am, there’s no camel here! . . .
What, you’re leaving?”
She was standing in the middle of the room, with her muff and shawl in
her hand.
“No, I’ll wait till you go, and I’ll go myself afterwards. I still have to
write a couple of words to Tatyana Pavlovna.”
“I’ll leave right now, right now, but once more: be happy, alone or with
the one you choose, and may God be with you! And I—I only need an
ideal!”
“Dear, kind Arkady Makarovich, believe me, of you I . . . My father
always says of you: ‘A dear, kind boy!’ Believe me, I’ll always remember
your stories about the poor boy abandoned among strangers, and about his
solitary dreams . . . I understand only too well how your soul was formed . .
. But now, though we’re students,” she added with a pleading and bashful

smile, pressing my hand, “it’s impossible for us to go on seeing each other
as before, and, and . . . surely you understand that?”
“Impossible?”
“Impossible, for a long time . . . it’s my fault . . . I see that it’s now quite
impossible . . . We’ll meet sometimes at papà’s . . .”
“You’re afraid of the ‘ardor’ of my feelings? You don’t trust me?” I was
about to cry out, but she suddenly became so abashed before me that the
words would not come out of my mouth.
“Tell me,” she suddenly stopped me right at the door, “did you yourself
see that . . . the letter . . . was torn up? Do you remember it well? How did
you know then that it was that same letter to Andronikov?”
“Kraft told me what was in it and even showed it to me . . . Good-bye!
Each time I was with you in your boudoir, I felt timid in your presence, and
when you left I was ready to throw myself down and kiss the spot on the
floor where your foot had stood . . .” I suddenly said unaccountably, not
knowing how or why myself, and, without looking at her, quickly left.
I raced home; there was rapture in my soul. Everything flashed through
my mind like a whirlwind, and my heart was full. Driving up to my
mother’s house, I suddenly remembered Liza’s ungratefulness towards
Anna Andreevna, her cruel, monstrous words earlier, and my heart suddenly
ached for them all! “How hard of heart they all are! And Liza, what’s with
her?” I thought, stepping onto the porch.
I dismissed Matvei and told him to come for me, to my apartment, at nine
o’clock.

Chapter Five
I
I WAS LATE for dinner, but they hadn’t sat down yet and were waiting for
me. Maybe because in general I dined with them rarely, certain special
additions had even been made: sardines appeared as an entrée, and so on.
But, to my surprise and grief, I found them all as if preoccupied, frowning
about something; Liza barely smiled when she saw me, and mama was
obviously worried; Versilov was smiling, but with effort. “Can they have
been quarreling?” it occurred to me. However, at first everything went well:
Versilov only winced a little at the soup with dumplings, and grimaced
badly when the stuffed meatcakes were served.
“I have only to warn you that my stomach can’t stand a certain dish, for it
to appear the very next day,” escaped him in vexation.
“But what are we to think up, Andrei Petrovich? There’s no way to think
up any sort of new dish,” mama answered timidly.
“Your mother is the direct opposite of some of our newspapers, for which
whatever is new is also good.” Versilov had meant to joke playfully and
amicably, but somehow it didn’t come off, and he only frightened mama
still more, who naturally understood nothing in the comparison of her with
a newspaper, and she looked around in perplexity. At that moment Tatyana
Pavlovna came in and, announcing that she had already had dinner, sat
down beside mama on the sofa.
I still hadn’t managed to gain this person’s favor; even the contrary, she
had begun to attack me still more for each and every thing. Her displeasure
with me had especially intensified of late: she couldn’t abide my foppish
clothes, and Liza told me she almost had a fit when she learned I had a
coachman. I ended by avoiding meeting her as far as possible. Two months

ago, after the return of the inheritance, I ran over to her to chat about
Versilov’s act, but I didn’t meet with the least sympathy; on the contrary,
she was awfully angry: it displeased her very much that it had all been
returned, and not just half. To me she observed sharply at the time:
“I’ll bet you’re convinced that he returned the money and challenged him
to a duel solely so as to better himself in the opinion of Arkady
Makarovich.”
And she had almost guessed right: in essence I actually felt something of
that sort at the time.
I understood at once, as soon as she came in, that she was bound to throw
herself upon me; I was even slightly convinced that she had, in fact, come
for that, and therefore I suddenly became extraordinarily casual; and it
didn’t cost me anything, because, after what had just taken place, I still
went on being in joy and radiance. I’ll note once and for all that never in my
life has casualness suited me, that is, it has never made me look good, but,
on the contrary, has always covered me with shame. So it happened now as
well: I instantly made a blunder; without any bad feeling, but purely from
thoughtlessness, having noticed that Liza was terribly dull, I suddenly
blurted out, not even thinking what I was saying:
“Once a century I have dinner here, and as if on purpose, Liza, you’re so
dull!”
“I have a headache,” Liza answered.
“Ah, my God,” Tatyana Pavlovna latched on, “so what if you’re sick?
Arkady Makarovich has deigned to come for dinner, so you must dance and
be merry.”
“You are decidedly the bane of my existence, Tatyana Pavlovna; never
will I come here when you’re here!”—and I slapped the table with my hand
in sincere vexation. Mama gave a start, and Versilov looked at me strangely.
I suddenly laughed and begged their pardon.

“I take back the word ‘bane,’ Tatyana Pavlovna,” I turned to her, going
on with my casualness.
“No, no,” she snapped, “it’s far more flattering for me to be your bane
than the opposite, you may be sure.”
“My dear, one should know how to endure the small banes of life,”
Versilov murmured, smiling. “Without them, life’s not worth living.”
“You know, sometimes you’re an awful retrograde!” I exclaimed with a
nervous laugh.
“Spit on it, my friend.”
“No, I won’t spit on it! Why don’t you tell an ass outright that he’s an
ass?”
“You don’t mean yourself, do you? First of all, I will not and cannot
judge anyone.”
“Why won’t you, why can’t you?”
“Laziness and distaste. An intelligent woman told me once that I had no
right to judge others, because I ‘don’t know how to suffer,’ and in order to
be a judge of others, you must gain the right to judge through suffering. It’s
a bit high-flown, but applied to me it may also be true, so that I even
submitted willingly to the judgment.”
“Can it be Tatyana Pavlovna who said that to you?” I exclaimed.
“How could you tell?” Versilov glanced at me with some surprise.
“I guessed from Tatyana Pavlovna’s face; she suddenly twitched so.”
I had guessed by chance. The phrase, as it turned out later, had indeed
been spoken to Versilov by Tatyana Pavlovna the day before in a heated
conversation. And in general, I repeat, it was the wrong time for me to fly at

them with my joy and expansiveness: each of them had his own cares, and
very heavy ones.
“I don’t understand anything, because it’s all so abstract with you; and
here’s a trait: you have this terrible love of speaking abstractly, Andrei
Petrovich. It’s an egoistic trait; only egoists love to speak abstractly.”
“Not stupidly put, but don’t nag.”
“No, excuse me,” I got at him with my expansiveness, “what does it
mean ‘to gain the right to judge through suffering’? Whoever’s honest can
be a judge—that’s what I think.”
“You’ll come up with very few judges, in that case.”
“I already know one.”
“Who’s that?”
“He’s now sitting and talking to me.”
Versilov chuckled strangely, leaned over right to my ear, and, taking me
by the shoulder, whispered to me, “He lies to you all the time.”
To this day I don’t understand what he had in mind then, but obviously at
that moment he was in some extreme anxiety (owing to a certain piece of
news, as I figured out later). But this phrase, “He lies to you all the time,”
was spoken so unexpectedly and so seriously, and with such a strange, not
at all jocular, expression, that I somehow shuddered all over nervously,
almost frightened, and looked at him wildly; but Versilov hastened to laugh.
“Ah, thank God!” said mama, frightened because he had whispered in my
ear. “And I was beginning to think . . . Don’t you be angry with us,
Arkasha, there will be intelligent people without us, but who’s going to love
you if we don’t have each other?”

“That’s why love among relations is immoral, mama, because it’s
unearned. Love has to be earned.”
“Who knows when you’ll earn it, but here we love you for nothing.”
Everyone suddenly laughed.
“Well, mama, maybe you didn’t mean to shoot, but you hit the bird!” I
cried out, also laughing.
“And you really imagined there was something to love you for,” Tatyana
Pavlovna fell upon me again. “Not only do they love you for nothing, but
they love you through revulsion!”
“Ah, not so!” I cried gaily. “Do you know who, maybe, talked today
about loving me?”
“Talked while laughing at you!” Tatyana Pavlovna picked up suddenly
with some sort of unnatural spite, as if she had been waiting for precisely
those words from me. “A delicate person, and especially a woman, would
be filled with loathing just from your inner filth alone. You’ve got a part in
your hair, fine linen, a suit from a French tailor, but it’s all filth! Who
clothes you, who feeds you, who gives you money to play roulette?
Remember who you’re not ashamed to take money from!”
Mama got so flushed, I’d never yet seen such shame on her face. I
cringed all over.
“If I spend, I spend my own money, and I owe nobody an accounting,” I
snapped, turning all red.
“Whose own? What’s your own?”
“If not mine, then Andrei Petrovich’s. He won’t refuse me . . . I’ve taken
from the prince against his debt to Andrei Petrovich . . .”

“My friend,” Versilov suddenly said firmly, “not a cent of that money is
mine.”
The phrase was terribly significant. I stopped short on the spot. Oh,
naturally, recalling my whole paradoxical and devil-may-care mood then, I
would, of course, have gotten out of it by some “most noble” impulse, or
catchy little word, or whatever, but I suddenly noticed a spiteful, accusing
expression on Liza’s frowning face, an unfair expression, almost mockery,
and it was as if the devil pulled at my tongue:
“You, madam,” I suddenly addressed her, “seem to visit Darya
Onisimovna frequently in the prince’s apartment? Be so good as to
personally convey to him this three hundred roubles, for which you roasted
me so much today!”
I produced the money and held it out to her. Will anyone believe that I
spoke those mean words then without any purpose, that is, without the
slightest allusion to anything? And there could have been no such allusion,
because at that moment I knew precisely nothing. Maybe I just had a wish
to needle her with something comparatively terribly innocent, something
like, say, a young lady mixing in what was not her business, so here, since
you absolutely want to mix in it, be so good as to go yourself to meet this
prince, a young man, a Petersburg officer, and give it to him, “since you
wish so much to meddle in young men’s affairs.” But what was my
amazement when mama suddenly stood up and, raising her finger in front
of me and shaking it at me, cried:
“Don’t you dare! Don’t you dare!”
I could never have imagined anything like that from her, and I myself
jumped up from my place, not really frightened, but with some sort of
suffering, with some sort of painful wound in my heart, suddenly realizing
that something grave had taken place. But mama couldn’t bear it for long;
she covered her face with her hands and quickly left the room. Liza, not
even glancing in my direction, went out after her. Tatyana Pavlovna gazed
at me silently for about half a minute:

“Can it be that you really wanted to blurt something out?” she exclaimed
enigmatically, gazing at me with the deepest astonishment, but, not waiting
for my reply, she also ran to them. Versilov, with an inimical, almost
spiteful look, rose from the table and took his hat from the corner.
“I suppose you’re not all that stupid, but merely innocent,” he murmured
mockingly. “If they come back, tell them not to wait for me with dessert:
I’ll take a little stroll.”
I was left alone. At first I felt strange, then offended, but then I saw
clearly that I was to blame. However, I didn’t know what in fact I was to
blame for, but only sensed something. I sat by the window and waited.
After waiting for some ten minutes, I also took my hat and went upstairs to
my former room. I knew they were there—that is, mama and Liza—and
that Tatyana Pavlovna had already gone. And so I found the two of them
together on my sofa, whispering about something. When I appeared, they
immediately stopped whispering. To my surprise, they were not angry with
me; mama at least smiled at me.
“I’m to blame, mama . . .” I began.
“Well, well, never mind,” mama interrupted, “only love each other and
don’t ever quarrel, and God will send you happiness.”
“He’ll never offend me, mama, I can tell you that!” Liza said with
conviction and feeling.
“If only it hadn’t been for this Tatyana Pavlovna, nothing would have
happened,” I cried. “She’s nasty!”
“Do you see, mama? Do you hear?” Liza pointed at me to her.
“I’ll tell you both this,” I pronounced, “if it’s vile in the world, the only
vile thing is me, and all the rest is lovely!”
“Arkasha, don’t be angry, dear, but what if you really did stop . . .”

“Gambling, is it? Gambling? I will, mama; I’m going today for the last
time, especially now that Andrei Petrovich himself has announced, and
aloud, that not a cent of that money is his. You won’t believe how I blush . .
. I must talk with him, however . . . Mama, dear, the last time I was here I
said . . . something awkward . . . mama, darling, I lied: I sincerely want to
believe, it was just bravado, I love Christ very much . . .”
The last time we had indeed had a conversation of that sort; mama had
been very upset and alarmed. Hearing me now, she smiled at me as at a
child:
“Christ will forgive everything, Arkasha: he will forgive your abuse, and
he will forgive more than that. Christ is our father, Christ needs nothing and
will shine even in the deepest darkness . . .”
I said good-bye to them and left, reflecting on my chances of seeing
Versilov that same day; I needed very much to have a talk with him, but just
now it had been impossible. I strongly suspected that he was waiting for me
at my place. I went on foot; after the warmth it had turned slightly frosty,
and it was very pleasant to take a stroll.

II
I LIVED NEAR the Voznesensky Bridge, in an enormous house, on the
courtyard. Almost going through the gateway, I bumped into Versilov, who
was leaving my place.
“As is my custom, I walked as far as your lodgings, and even waited for
you at Pyotr Ippolitovich’s, but I got bored. They’re eternally quarreling,
and today his wife has even kept to her bed, weeping. I looked in and left.”
I became vexed for some reason.
“Can it be that I’m the only one you go to see, and besides me and Pyotr
Ippolitovich, you have nobody in all Petersburg?”
“My friend . . . but it makes no difference.”

“Where to now?”
“No, I won’t go back to your place. If you like, we can stroll a bit, it’s a
nice evening.”
“If, instead of abstract reasonings, you had talked to me like a human
being and, for instance, had only so much as hinted to me about this cursed
gambling, maybe I wouldn’t have gotten drawn into it like a fool,” I said
suddenly.
“You regret it? That’s good,” he said, sifting his words. “I’ve always
suspected that gambling isn’t the main thing with you, but only a tem-porary deviation . . . You’re right, my friend, gambling is swinishness, and
what’s more, one can lose.”
“And lose someone else’s money.”
“Have you lost someone else’s money as well?”
“I’ve lost yours. I took from the prince against your account. Of course, it
was awfully preposterous and stupid on my part . . . to regard your money
as my own, but I kept wanting to win it back.”
“I warn you once again, my dear, that none of that money is mine. I know
the young man is in a squeeze himself, and I don’t count on him at all,
despite his promises.”
“In that case, I’m in twice as bad a position . . . I’m in a comical position!
And why on earth should he give to me or I take from him, then?”
“That’s your business . . . But you really don’t have the slightest reason
for taking from him, eh?”
“Besides comradeship . . .”
“No, besides comradeship? There isn’t anything that would make it
possible for you to take from him, eh? Well, for whatever considerations?”

“What considerations? I don’t understand.”
“So much the better if you don’t understand, and, I confess, my friend, I
was sure of that. Brisons là, mon cher,37 and try somehow not to gamble.”
“If only you’d told me beforehand! Even now you talk to me as if you’re
mumbling.”
“If I’d told you beforehand, we would only have quarreled, and you
wouldn’t have been so willing to let me call on you in the evenings. And
know, my dear, that all this saving advice beforehand is only an intrusion
into another’s conscience at the other’s expense. I’ve done enough jumping
into other people’s consciences and in the end suffered nothing but flicks
and mockery. Of course, I spit on flicks and mockery, but the main thing is
that you achieve nothing by this maneuver: nobody will listen to you, for all
your intruding . . . and everybody will dislike you.”
“I’m glad you’ve begun to talk with me about something besides
abstractions. I want to ask you about one more thing, I’ve long wanted to,
but somehow with you it was always impossible. It’s good that we’re in the
street. Remember that evening at your place, the last evening, two months
ago, how we sat in my ‘coffin’ and I asked you about mama and Makar
Ivanovich—remember how ‘casual’ I was with you then? Could a young
pup of a son be allowed to speak of his mother in such terms? And what,
then? You didn’t let it show by one little word; on the contrary, you ‘opened
yourself up’ to me, and made me even more casual.”
“My friend, it’s all too pleasant for me to hear . . . such feelings from you
. . . Yes, I remember very well, I was actually waiting then for your face to
turn red, and if I added to it myself, maybe it was precisely to push you to
the limit . . .”
“And all you did was deceive me then, and trouble the pure spring in my
soul still more! Yes, I’m a pathetic adolescent and don’t know myself from
minute to minute what’s evil and what’s good. If you had shown me just a

bit of the way then, I would have guessed and jumped at once onto the right
path. But you only made me angry then.”
“Cher enfant, I’ve always sensed that you and I would become close in
one way or another: this ‘red’ in your face did come to you of itself and
without my directions, and that, I swear, is the better for you . . . I notice,
my dear, that you’ve acquired a lot lately . . . could it be in the company of
this little prince?”
“Don’t praise me, I don’t like it. Don’t leave the painful suspicion in my
heart that you’re praising me out of Jesuitism, to the detriment of truth, so
that I won’t stop liking you. But recently . . . you see . . . I’ve been calling
on women. I’m very well received, for instance, at Anna Andreevna’s, did
you know that?”
“I know it from her, my friend. Yes, she’s very sweet and intelligent.
Mais brisons là, mon cher. I feel somehow strangely vile today—spleen, or
what? I ascribe it to hemorrhoids. How are things at home? All right?
Naturally, you made peace there and there were embraces. Cela va sans
dire.38 It’s somehow sad to go back to them sometimes, even after the
nastiest walk. Truly, at times I make an unnecessary detour in the rain, only
to put off going back to those lower depths . . . And the boredom, the
boredom, oh, God!”
“Mama . . .”
“Your mother is the most perfect and lovely being, mais . . . In short, I’m
probably not worthy of them. By the way, what’s with them today? Lately
they’ve all been somehow sort of . . . You know, I always try to ignore it,
but today they’ve got something brewing there . . . You didn’t notice
anything?”
“I know decidedly nothing and wouldn’t even have noticed anything, if it
hadn’t been for that cursed Tatyana Pavlovna, who can’t keep from biting.
You’re right: there’s something there. Today I found Liza at Anna

Andreevna’s; there, too, she was somehow . . . she even surprised me. You
do know that she’s received at Anna Andreevna’s?”
“I do, my friend. And you . . . when were you at Anna Andreevna’s—that
is, at precisely what hour? I need that for the sake of a certain fact.”
“From two to three. And imagine, as I was leaving, the prince came . . .”
Here I told him about my whole visit in extreme detail. He listened to it
all silently: about the possibility of the prince proposing to Anna Andreevna
he didn’t utter a word; to my rapturous praises of Anna Andreevna he again
mumbled that “she’s sweet.”
“I managed to astonish her extremely today by telling her the most freshbaked society news about Katerina Nikolaevna Akhmakov marrying Baron
Bjoring,” I said suddenly, as if something in me had come unhinged.
“Oh? Imagine, she told me that same ‘news’ earlier today, before noon,
that is, much earlier than you could have astonished her with it.”
“What?” I just stopped in my tracks. “But how could she have found out?
Though what am I saying? Naturally, she could have found out before me,
but imagine: she listened to me say it as if it was absolute news! Though . . .
though what am I saying? Long live breadth! One must allow for breadth of
character, right? I, for instance, would have blurted it all out at once, but she
locks it up in a snuffbox . . . And so be it, so be it, nonetheless she’s the
loveliest being and the most excellent character!”
“Oh, no doubt, to each his own! And what’s most original of all: these
excellent characters are sometimes able to puzzle you in an extremely
peculiar way. Imagine, today Anna Andreevna suddenly takes me aback
with the question, ‘Do you love Katerina Nikolaevna Akhmakov, or not?’”
“What a wild and incredible question!” I cried out, dumbfounded again.
My eyes even went dim. Never yet had I ventured to talk with him on this
subject, and—here he himself . . .

“What did she formulate it with?”
“With nothing, my friend, absolutely nothing; the snuffbox was locked
up at once and still tighter, and, above all, notice, I had never allowed even
the possibility of such conversations with me, nor had she . . . However,
you say yourself that you know her, and therefore you can imagine how
such a question suits her . . . You wouldn’t happen to know anything?”
“I’m as puzzled as you are. Some sort of curiosity, or maybe a joke?”
“Oh, on the contrary, a most serious question, and not a question, but
almost, so to speak, an inquiry, and evidently for the most extreme and
categorical reasons. Won’t you be going there? Mightn’t you find
something out? I’d even ask you to, you see . . .”
“But the possibility, above all—the possibility alone of supposing that
you love Katerina Nikolaevna! Forgive me, I’m still dumbfounded. I’ve
never, never allowed myself to speak with you on this or any similar subject
. . .”
“And you’ve done wisely, my dear.”
“Your former intrigues and relations—no, the subject is, of course,
impossible between us, and it would even be stupid on my part; but,
precisely in this last period, in the last few days, I’ve exclaimed to myself
several times: what if you had loved this woman once, even for a moment?
Oh, you would never have made such an awful mistake regarding her in
your opinion of her as the one that came out afterwards! Of what came out,
I do know: of your mutual enmity and your mutual, so to speak, aversion
for each other, I do know, I’ve heard, I’ve heard only too well, I heard still
in Moscow; but it’s precisely here first of all that the fact of a bitter aversion
leaps to the surface, the bitterness of hostility, precisely of non-love, and yet
Anna Andreevna suddenly puts it to you, ‘Do you love her?’ Can she be so
poorly renseigneered?39 It’s a wild thing! She was laughing, I assure you,
she was laughing!”

“But I notice, my dear,” something nervous and soulfelt suddenly
sounded in his voice, something that went to the heart, which happened
terribly rarely with him, “I notice that you yourself speak of it all too
ardently. You just said that you call on women . . . of course, for me to
question you is somehow . . . on this subject, as you put it . . . But doesn’t
‘that woman’ also figure on the list of your newer friends?”
“That woman . . .” My voice suddenly trembled. “Listen, Andrei
Petrovich, listen: that woman is what you said today at the prince’s about
‘living life’—remember? You said that this living life is something so direct
and simple, which looks at you so directly, that precisely because of this
directness and clarity it’s impossible to believe it could be precisely what
we seek so hard all our lives . . . Well, so with such views you met the ideal
woman, and in perfection, in the ideal, you recognized—‘all vices’! There
you are!”
The reader can judge what a frenzy I was in.
“‘All vices’! Ho, ho! I know that phrase!” exclaimed Versilov. “And if
it’s gone so far as telling you such a phrase, shouldn’t you be congratulated
for something? It means such intimacy between you that you may even
have to be praised for your modesty and secrecy, which a young man is
rarely capable of . . .”
A sweet, friendly, affectionate laughter sparkled in his voice . . . there
was something inviting and sweet in his words, in his bright face, as far as I
could tell at night. He was surprisingly excited. Involuntarily, I sparkled all
over.
“Modesty! Secrecy! Oh, no, no!” I exclaimed, blushing and at the same
time squeezing his hand, which I had somehow managed to seize and,
without noticing it, would not let go of. “No, not for anything! . . . In short,
there’s nothing to congratulate me for, and never, never can anything
happen here.” I was breathless and flying, and I so wanted to be flying, it
felt so good to me. “You know . . . well, let it be so just once, for one little
time! You see, my darling, my nice papa—you’ll let me call you papa—it’s

impossible, not only for a father and son, but for anyone, to talk with a third
person about his relations with a woman, even the purest of them! Even the
purer they are, the more forbidden it ought to be. It’s forbidding, it’s coarse,
in short—a confidant is impossible! But if there’s nothing, absolutely
nothing, then it’s possible to talk, isn’t it?”
“As your heart dictates.”
“An indiscreet, a very indiscreet question. You’ve known women in your
life, you’ve had liaisons? . . . I’m asking generally, generally, not in
particular!” I was blushing and spluttering with rapture.
“Let’s suppose there were lapses.”
“So here’s an occasion, and you explain it to me, as a more experienced
person: a woman, while taking leave of you, suddenly says somehow by
chance, looking away, ‘Tomorrow at three o’clock I’ll be at such and such
place’ . . . well, say, at Tatyana Pavlovna’s,” I came unhinged and flew off
definitively. My heart gave a throb and stopped; I even stopped talking, I
couldn’t. He was listening terribly.
“And so the next day I’m at Tatyana Pavlovna’s at three o’clock, I go in
and reason like this: ‘If the cook opens the door’—you know her cook?
—‘I’ll ask her first off: is Tatyana Pavlovna at home? And if the cook says
Tatyana Pavlovna isn’t at home, but some lady visitor’s sitting and waiting
—what should I have concluded, tell me, if you . . . In short, if you . . .’”
“Quite simply that you had an appointed rendezvous. But that means it
took place? And took place today? Yes?”
“Oh, no, no, no, nothing, nothing! It took place, but it wasn’t that; a
rendezvous, but not for that, and I announce it first of all, so as not to be a
scoundrel, it happened, but . . .”
“My friend, all this is beginning to become so curious, that I suggest . . .”

“Myself, I used to give a tenner or a twenty-fiver to solicitors. For a
dram. Just a few kopecks, it’s a lieutenant soliciting, a former lieutenant
asking!” The tall figure of a solicitor, maybe indeed a retired lieutenant,
suddenly blocked our way. Most curious of all, he was quite well dressed
for his profession, and yet he had his hand out.

III
I PURPOSELY DO not want to omit this most paltry anecdote about the
insignificant lieutenant, because I now recall the whole of Versilov not
otherwise than with all the minutest circumstantial details of that moment
so fateful for him. Fateful, but I didn’t know it!
“If you do not leave us alone, sir, I shall immediately call the police,”
Versilov, stopping before the lieutenant, suddenly raised his voice somehow
unnaturally. I could never have imagined such wrath from such a
philosopher, and for such an insignificant reason. And note that we
interrupted the conversation at the moment most interesting for him, as he
said himself.
“So you really don’t even have a fifteener?” the lieutenant cried rudely,
waving his arm. “On what sort of canaille can you find a fifteener
nowadays? Rabble! Scoundrels! He’s all in beaver, yet he makes a state
problem out of a fifteener!”
“Police!” shouted Versilov.
But there was no need to shout; a policeman was standing just at the
corner and had heard the lieutenant’s abuse himself.
“I ask you to be a witness to the insult, and you I ask to kindly come to
the police station,” said Versilov.
“E-eh, it’s all the same to me, you’ll prove decidedly nothing! Your
intelligence least of all!”

“Don’t let go of him, officer, and take us there,” Versilov concluded
insistently.
“Must we go to the police station? Devil take him!” I whispered to him.
“Absolutely, my dear. This presumptuousness in our streets is beginning
to be tiresomely outrageous, and if each of us did his duty, it would be
useful for all. C’est comique, mais c’est ce que nous ferons.”40
For about a hundred steps the lieutenant was very hot-tempered, spirited,
and brave. He assured us that “this was impossible,” that it was all “ ’cause
of a fifteener,” and so on, and so forth. But he finally started whispering
something to the policeman. The policeman, a sensible fellow and clearly
an enemy of street nervousness, seemed to be on his side, but only in a
certain sense. To his questions, he murmured in a half-whisper that “it’s
impossible now,” that “the thing’s under way,” and that “if, for instance,
you were to apologize, and the gentleman would agree to accept your
apology, then maybe . . .”
“Well, li-i-isten he-e-re, my dear sir, so, where are we going? I ask you,
where are we trying to get to and what’s so clever about it?” the lieutenant
cried loudly. “If a man unlucky in his misfortunes agrees to offer an
apology . . . if, finally, you need his humiliation . . . Devil take it, we’re not
in a drawing room, we’re in the street! For the street, this is apology enough
. . .”
Versilov stopped and suddenly rocked with laughter; I even thought for a
moment that he had gone ahead with this whole story for the fun of it, but
that wasn’t so.
“I pardon you completely, Mr. Lieutenant, and I assure you that you have
abilities. Act this way in a drawing room, and soon it will be quite enough
for the drawing room as well, but meanwhile here’s forty kopecks for you,
have a drink and a bite to eat. Pardon me for the trouble, officer, I’d reward
you, too, for your labors, but you’re all on such a noble footing now . . . My
dear,” he turned to me, “there’s an eatery here, in fact a terrible cesspool,

but one can have tea there, and I’d suggest to you . . . here it is now, come
on.”
I repeat, I had never seen him in such excitement, though his face was
cheerful and shone with light; but I noticed that when he was taking the two
twenty-kopeck pieces from his purse to give to the lieutenant, his hands
shook and his fingers wouldn’t obey at all, so that he finally asked me to
take them out and give them to the man. I can’t forget that.
He brought me to a little tavern on the canal, in the basement. The
customers were few. A hoarse little organ was playing out of tune, it
smelled of dirty napkins; we sat down in the corner.
“Maybe you don’t know? I like sometimes, out of boredom, out of
terrible inner boredom . . . to go into various cesspools like this one. These
furnishings, this stuttering aria from Lucia,22 these waiters in costumes that
are Russian to the point of indecency, this stench of tobacco, these shouts
from the billiard room—all this is so banal and prosaic that it borders
almost on the fantastic. Well, so what, my dear? This son of Mars stopped
us at the most interesting place, it seems . . . But here’s our tea; I like the tea
here . . . Imagine, Pyotr Ippolitovich has now suddenly started assuring that
other lodger, the pockmarked one, that in the last century a committee of
jurists was especially appointed in the English Parliament to examine the
whole trial of Christ before the high priest and Pilate,23 solely in order to
find out how it would go now, by our laws, and that it was all done with all
solemnity, with lawyers, prosecutors, and the rest . . . well, and that the jury
had to hand down a guilty verdict . . . Amazing—eh, what? That fool of a
lodger started arguing, got angry, quarreled, and announced that he was
moving out the next day . . . the landlady bursts into tears, because she’s
losing money . . . Mais passons.41 Sometimes they have nightingales in
these taverns. Do you know the old Moscow anecdote à la Pyotr
Ippolitovich? A nightingale is singing in a Moscow tavern. A merchant
comes in, the ‘out o’ me way’ type: ‘How much is the nightingale?’ ‘A
hundred roubles.’ ‘Roast it and serve it.’ They roasted it and served it. ‘Cut
me ten kopecks’ worth.’ I once told it to Pyotr Ippolitovich, but he didn’t
believe it and even got indignant . . .”

He said a lot more. I quote these fragments as a sample. He interrupted
me continually, as soon as I opened my mouth to begin my story, and began
talking some sort of completely peculiar and inappropriate nonsense; he
talked excitedly, gaily; laughed at God knows what, and even tittered—
something I had never seen him do. He drank a glass of tea at one gulp and
poured another. Now I understand: he was then like a man who has received
a precious, curious, and long-awaited letter, which he places before him and
doesn’t open on purpose; on the contrary, he turns it over in his hands for a
long time, studies the envelope, the seal, goes to another room to give
orders, puts off, in short, the most interesting moment, knowing that it
won’t get away from him for anything, and all this for the greater fullness
of pleasure.
I, naturally, told him everything, everything from the very beginning, and
it took me maybe about an hour. And how else could it be? I had been
longing to talk all the while. I began from our very first meeting, at the
prince’s that time, on her arrival from Moscow; then I told how it all went
on gradually. I didn’t leave anything out, and I couldn’t have: he led me on
himself, guessed, prompted me. At moments it seemed to me that
something fantastic was happening, that he had been sitting somewhere or
standing behind the door, each time, for all those two months: he knew
beforehand my every gesture, my every feeling. I took a boundless pleasure
in making this confession to him, because I saw in him such heartfelt
gentleness, such deep psychological subtlety, such an astonishing ability to
guess from a quarter of a word. He listened tenderly, like a woman. Above
all, he managed to make it so that I wasn’t ashamed of anything; at times he
suddenly stopped me at some detail; he often stopped me and repeated
nervously, “Don’t forget the small things, above all, don’t forget the small
things—the smaller the trace, the more important it sometimes is.” And he
interrupted me several times in the same way. Oh, naturally, I began
haughtily in the beginning, haughtily towards her, but I quickly came down
to the truth. I told him sincerely that I was ready to throw myself down and
kiss the place on the floor where her foot had stood. The most beautiful, the
brightest thing of all was that he understood in the highest degree that she
“could suffer from fear over the document” and at the same time remain a
pure and irreproachable being, as she had revealed herself to me that same

day. He understood in the highest degree the word “student.” But as I was
finishing, I noticed that, through his kind smile, something all too impatient
began to flash in his eyes, something as if distracted and sharp. When I
came to the “document,” I thought to myself, “Shall I tell him the real truth
or not?”—and I didn’t, despite all my rapture. I note it here to remember it
all my life. I explained the matter to him in the same way I had to her, that
is, by Kraft. His eyes lit up. A strange wrinkle flitted across his forehead, a
very dark wrinkle.
“You firmly recall, my dear, about that letter, that Kraft burned it in a
candle? You’re not mistaken?”
“I’m not mistaken,” I confirmed.
“The thing is that that piece of writing is very important for her, and if it
had been in your hands today, then even today you might . . .” But “might ”
what, he didn’t finish saying. “And so, it’s not in your hands now?”
I shuddered inwardly, but not outwardly. Outwardly I didn’t betray
myself in any way, didn’t bat an eye; but still I couldn’t believe the
question.
“How not in my hands? In my hands now? If Kraft burned it then?”
“Yes?” he aimed a fiery, fixed gaze at me, a gaze I remembered.
However, he was smiling, but all his goodnaturedness, all the femininity of
expression he had had till then, suddenly disappeared. What came was
something indefinite and disconnected; he was becoming more and more
distracted. If he had been more in control of himself then, as he had been up
to that moment, he wouldn’t have asked me that question about the
document; if he did, it was probably because he was in a frenzy himself.
However, I say it only now; but at that time it took me a while to perceive
the change that had taken place in him. I still went on flying, and there was
the same music in my soul. But the story was over; I looked at him.
“An amazing thing,” he said suddenly, when I had spoken everything out
to the last comma, “a very strange thing, my friend: you say you were there

from three to four, and that Tatyana Pavlovna wasn’t at home?”
“Exactly from three till half-past four.”
“Well, imagine, I stopped to see Tatyana Pavlovna at exactly half-past
three to the minute, and she met me in the kitchen—I almost always come
to see her by the back entrance.”
“What, she met you in the kitchen?” I cried, drawing back in amazement.
“Yes, and she told me she couldn’t receive me; I stayed with her a couple
of minutes, and I had only come to invite her to dinner.”
“Maybe she just came back from somewhere?”
“I don’t know; though—of course not. She was in her housecoat. This
was exactly at half-past three.”
“But . . . Tatyana Pavlovna didn’t tell you I was there?”
“No, she didn’t tell me you were there . . . Otherwise I’d have known and
wouldn’t be asking you about it.”
“Listen, this is very important . . .”
“Yes . . . depending on one’s point of view; and you’ve even turned pale,
my dear; but, anyhow, what’s so important?”
“I’ve been laughed at like a child!”
“She was simply ‘afraid of your ardor,’ as she put it to you herself—well,
and so she enlisted Tatyana Pavlovna.”
“But, my God, what a trick it was! Listen, she let me say all that with a
third person there, with Tatyana Pavlovna there—who, consequently, heard
everything I said! It’s . . . it’s even terrible to imagine!”

“C’est selon, mon cher! 42 And besides, you yourself mentioned earlier
the ‘breadth’ of view of women in general, and exclaimed, ‘Long live
breadth!’”
“If I were Othello and you Iago, you couldn’t have done it better . . .
however, I’m laughing! There can’t be any Othello, because there are no
such relations. And how not laugh! So be it! I still believe in what is
infinitely higher than I am, and I haven’t lost my ideal! . . . If it’s a joke on
her part, I forgive her. A joke on the pathetic adolescent—so be it! I didn’t
get myself up as anything, and the student—the student was and remains
anyway, no matter what, he was in her soul, he exists and will go on
existing! Enough! Listen, what do you think: shall I go to her now, to learn
the whole truth, or not?”
I said, “I’m laughing,” but there were tears in my eyes.
“Why not? Go, my friend, if you want to.”
“It’s as if I’ve dirtied my soul by telling you all this. Don’t be angry, dear
heart, but it’s impossible to tell a third person about a woman, I repeat,
about a woman. No confidant will understand; not even an angel will
understand. If you respect a woman, don’t take a confidant; if you respect
yourself, don’t take a confidant! I don’t respect myself now. Good-bye; I
can’t forgive myself . . .”
“Come, my dear, you’re exaggerating. You say yourself ‘there was
nothing.’”
We went out to the canal and began saying good-bye.
“Will you never kiss me from the heart, as a child, as a son kisses his
father?” he said to me with a strange tremor in his voice. I kissed him
warmly.
“My dear . . . always be as pure of heart as you are now.”

I had never kissed him before in my life, I could never have imagined he
would want me to.

Chapter Six
I
“GO, OF COURSE!” I decided, hurrying home. “Go at once. Quite
possibly I’ll find her at home alone—alone or with someone, it makes no
difference—I can call her away. She’ll receive me; she’ll be surprised, but
she’ll receive me. And if she doesn’t, I’ll insist that she receive me, I’ll send
to tell her it’s extremely necessary. She’ll think it’s something about the
document and receive me. And I’ll find out all about Tatyana. And then . . .
and then what? If I’m wrong, I’ll make it up to her, and if I’m right, and
she’s to blame, then it’s all over! In any case—it’s all over! What can I
lose? I can’t lose anything. Go! Go!”
And then—I’ll never forget it and I remember it with pride—I didn’t go!
No one will ever know it, it will just die, but it’s enough that I know it and
that at such a moment I was capable of the noblest impulse! “This is a
temptation, and I’ll pass it by,” I decided finally, thinking better of it. “They
frightened me with a fact, but I didn’t believe it and didn’t lose faith in her
purity! And why go, why ask? Why should she believe so unfailingly in me
as I did in her, believe in my ‘purity,’ not be afraid of my ‘ardor,’ not enlist
Tatyana? I haven’t deserved it yet in her eyes. Let her not, let her not know
that I do deserve it, that I don’t yield to ‘temptations,’ that I don’t believe
wicked calumnies about her; but I myself know it and will respect myself
for it. Respect my feeling. Oh, yes, she allowed me to speak myself out
with Tatyana there, she allowed Tatyana, she knew that Tatyana was sitting
and eavesdropping (because she couldn’t help eavesdropping), she knew
that she was laughing at me—it’s terrible, terrible! But . . . but what if it
was impossible to avoid? What could she have done in her position today,
and how can she be blamed for it? No, I myself lied to her about Kraft, I
deceived her, because it was also impossible to avoid it, and I lied
involuntarily, innocently. My God,” I suddenly exclaimed, blushing
painfully, “and I, what have I just done myself? Haven’t I just dragged her

before the same Tatyana, haven’t I just told everything to Versilov? Though
—what’s the matter with me?—there’s a difference here. Here it was only
about the document; essentially, I just told Versilov about the document,
because there was nothing more to tell about, and there couldn’t be. Wasn’t
I the first to inform him and cry that ‘there couldn’t be’? He’s a man of
understanding. Hm . . . But what hatred there is in his heart for this woman,
though, even now! And what a drama must have taken place between them
then and from what? Of course, from self-love! Versilov can’t be capable of
any other feeling except boundless self-love! ”
Yes, this last thought escaped me then, and I didn’t even notice it. It was
such thoughts that raced through my head then one after another, and I was
straightforward with myself then: I wasn’t being sly, I wasn’t deceiving
myself; and if there was something I didn’t comprehend then at that
moment, it was just because I didn’t have brains enough, and not from
Jesuitism with myself.
I returned home in a terribly excited and, I don’t know why, a terribly
merry state of mind, though a very unclear one. But I was afraid to analyze
and tried with all my might to divert myself. I went to my landlady at once;
indeed, a terrible falling out was under way between her and her husband.
She was a very consumptive clerk’s wife, maybe even a kind one, but, like
all consumptives, extremely capricious. I at once began to make peace
between them, went to see the tenant, a very coarse, pockmarked fool, an
extremely vain clerk who served in a bank, Chervyakov, whom I myself
disliked very much, but with whom, anyhow, I got along well, because I
often had the baseness to join him in teasing Pyotr Ippolitovich. I at once
persuaded him not to move out, and he himself would not have ventured to
actually move out. In the end I reassured the landlady definitively and, on
top of that, managed to straighten the pillow under her head excellently.
“Pyotr Ippolitovich can never manage like that,” she concluded maliciously.
Then I busied myself with her mustard plasters in the kitchen, and with my
own hands prepared two superb plasters for her. Poor Pyotr Ippolitovich
only looked at me with envy, but I didn’t let him touch them and was
rewarded literally by tears of gratitude from her. And then, I remember, I
suddenly got bored with it all, and I suddenly realized that I was by no

means looking after the sick woman out of the goodness of my heart, but
just so, for some reason, for something else entirely.
I waited nervously for Matvei. That evening I decided to try my luck for
the last time and . . . and, apart from luck, I felt a terrible need to gamble;
otherwise it would have been unbearable. If I hadn’t had to go anywhere,
maybe I wouldn’t have held out and would have gone to her. Matvei was to
come soon, but suddenly the door opened and an unexpected visitor came in
—Darya Onisimovna. I winced and was surprised. She knew my lodgings
because she had come once on an errand from mama. I sat her down and
began looking at her questioningly. She said nothing, but only looked me
straight in the eye and smiled submissively.
“Have you come from Liza?” it occurred to me to ask.
“No, just so, sir.”
I warned her that I would be leaving presently; again she answered that
she had come “just so” and would leave presently herself. For some reason
I suddenly felt sorry for her. I’ll note that she had seen much sympathy from
us all, from mama and especially from Tatyana Pavlovna, but once she was
placed with Mrs. Stolbeev, we all somehow began to forget her, except
perhaps for Liza, who often visited her. She herself, it seems, was the cause
of that, because she had a capacity for withdrawing and effacing herself,
despite all her submissive and ingratiating smiles. Personally I very much
disliked those smiles, and the fact that she always obviously falsified her
face, and I even thought once that she had not grieved long over her Olya.
But this time for some reason I felt sorry for her.
And then suddenly, without saying a word, she bent forward, looked
down, and, suddenly thrusting out both arms, put them around my waist and
leaned her face against my knees. She seized my hand, I almost thought she
was going to kiss it, but she pressed it to her eyes, and a flood of hot tears
poured over it. She was all shaking with sobs, but she wept quietly. My
heart was wrung, despite the fact that I was also as if vexed. But she
embraced me with complete trust, not afraid in the least that I would get

angry, despite the fact that she had smiled at me so timorously and servilely
just before. I began asking her to calm down.
“Dear heart, darling, I don’t know what to do with myself. When it gets
dark, I can’t stand it; when it gets dark, I can’t stand it any more, I’m drawn
outside, into the darkness. What draws me, mainly, is a dream. There’s this
dream born in my mind, that just as I step out, I’ll meet her in the street. I
walk and it’s as if I see her. That is, it’s somebody else walking, but I walk
behind on purpose and think: isn’t it her, there now, I think, isn’t that my
Olya? And I think and think. I get stupefied in the end, only knocking into
people, it’s sickening. Knocking about like I’m drunk, and people abuse me.
I keep it to myself, I don’t go to anyone. Or if I do, it’s more sickening. I
was passing by your place and thought, ‘Why don’t I drop in; he’s the
kindest of them all, and he was there then.’ Dear heart, forgive a useless
woman; I’ll leave now and go away . . .”
She suddenly got up and began to hurry. Just then Matvei arrived; I put
her into the sledge and took her home to Mrs. Stolbeev’s apartment on the
way.

II
MOST RECENTLY I had started going to play roulette at Zershchikov’s.
Before that I had gone to three houses, always with the prince, who had
“introduced” me in those places. In one of those houses the game was
predominantly faro, and they played for very significant money. But I didn’t
like it there; I saw it was only good there if you had big money, and besides,
it was frequented by too many insolent people and “thundering” youth from
high society. That was what the prince liked; he liked to gamble, but he also
liked to hobnob with those rakehells. I noticed on those evenings that,
though he sometimes came in with me, he somehow distanced himself from
me during the evening and didn’t introduce me to any of “his people.” I
looked around like a perfect savage, sometimes even so much so that I
happened to attract attention. At the gambling table I sometimes even had to
speak with one or another of them; but once, the next day, right there in
those rooms, I tried to greet one little sir with whom I had not only talked

but even laughed the day before, sitting next to him, and I had even guessed
two cards for him, and what then?—he didn’t recognize me at all. Worse
than that: he looked at me as if with sham perplexity and walked past
smiling. Thus I soon dropped the place and got into the habit of going to a
certain cesspool—I don’t know what else to call it. It was a roulette house,
rather insignificant, paltry, kept by a certain kept woman, though she never
appeared in the room herself. It was a terribly unbuttoned place, and though
officers frequented it, and rich merchants, everything came out a bit dirtily,
which many, however, found attractive. Besides, I often had luck there. But
I dropped that place, too, after a certain repulsive incident that occurred at
the height of a game and ended in a fight between two players, and started
going to Zershchikov’s, where, again, I was introduced by the prince. The
owner was a retired cavalry staff-captain, and the tone at his evenings was
quite tolerable, military, ticklishly irritable in observing the forms of honor,
clipped and businesslike. Jokers and big carousers, for instance, didn’t show
up there. Besides, the faro bank was hardly a joking matter. They played
faro and roulette. Up to that evening, the fifteenth of November, I had gone
there twice in all, and Zershchikov, it seemed, already knew my face; but I
didn’t have any acquaintances yet. As if on purpose, the prince and Darzan
showed up that evening only at around midnight, returning from the faro of
those society rakehells that I had dropped. Thus, on that evening I was like
a stranger in an alien crowd.
If I had a reader and he had read all that I’ve already written about my
adventures, doubtless there would be no point in explaining to him that I am
decidedly not created for any society whatever. Above all, I’m totally
unable to behave myself in society. When I walk in somewhere where there
are many people, it always feels to me that all their looks electrify me. I
decidedly begin to cringe, cringe physically, even in such places as the
theater, to say nothing of private houses. At all these roulettes and
gatherings I decidedly failed to acquire any kind of bearing: first I sit and
reproach myself for my unnecessary softness and politeness, then suddenly
I get up and commit some rudeness. And meanwhile such blackguards,
compared with me, managed to behave themselves there with astonishing
bearing—and that was what infuriated me most of all, so that I lost my
coolheadedness more and more. I’ll say straight out that, not only now, but

then as well, this whole society—and even winning itself, if all be told—
finally became repugnant and tormenting to me. Decidedly tormenting. Of
course, I experienced an extreme pleasure, but that pleasure came by way of
torment; all of it, that is, these people, the gambling, and, above all, I
myself there with them, seemed terribly dirty to me. “The moment I win,
I’ll spit on it all at once!” I said to myself each time, falling asleep at dawn
in my lodgings after the night’s gambling. And then again this winning:
take just the fact that I had no love of money at all. That is, I’m not going to
repeat the vile pronouncements usual in such explanations, that I gambled,
say, for the sake of gambling, for the sensation, for the pleasure of risk,
passion, and so on, and not at all for gain. I needed money terribly, and
though it was not my way, not my idea, somehow or other I still decided
then, as an experiment, to try this way, too. One strong thought kept
throwing me off here: “You’ve already figured out that you can unfailingly
become a millionaire only if you have a suitably strong character. You’ve
already tested your character; show yourself here as well: does roulette call
for more character than your idea?” That’s what I repeated to myself. And
since even to this day I hold the conviction that in games of chance, given a
complete calmness of character, which preserves all the subtlety of
intelligence and calculation, it is impossible not to overcome the crudeness
of blind luck and win—so, naturally, I had to grow more and more vexed,
seeing that at every moment I failed to sustain my character and got carried
away like a perfect little brat. “I, who could endure hunger, cannot endure
such a stupid thing!” That’s what irked me. What’s more, the awareness I
have that no matter how ridiculous and humiliated I may seem, there lies
within me that treasure of strength which will someday make them all
change their opinion of me, this awareness—almost since the humiliated
years of my childhood—then constituted the only source of my life, my
light and my dignity, my weapon and my consolation, otherwise I might
have killed myself while still a child. And therefore how could I not be
irritated with myself, seeing what a pathetic being I turned into at the
gaming table? That was why I could no longer leave off gambling; now I
see it all clearly. Besides that main thing, my petty self-love also suffered.
Losing humiliated me before the prince, before Versilov, though he never
deigned to say anything, before everybody, even before Tatyana—so it
seemed, so it felt to me. Finally, I’ll make yet another confession: I was

already corrupted then; it was already hard for me to give up a seven-course
dinner in the restaurant, Matvei, the English shop, my perfumer’s opinion—
well, and all that. I was aware of it then, too, only I waved it away; now,
though, in writing it down, I blush.

III
ARRIVING ALONE AND finding myself in an unfamiliar crowd, I first
settled myself at the corner of the table and began staking small sums, and
sat like that for about two hours without stirring. In those two hours, terrible
rubbish went on—neither this nor that. I missed astonishing chances and
tried not to get angry, but to succeed by coolheadedness and confidence.
The end was that in the whole two hours I neither lost nor won: of the three
hundred roubles, I lost some ten or fifteen. This insignificant result angered
me, and what’s more a most unpleasant vileness occurred. I know that there
sometimes happen to be thieves at these roulette tables—that is, not from
the street, but simply among the well-known gamblers. I’m certain, for
instance, that the well-known gambler Aferdov is a thief; to this day he cuts
a figure around town: I met him recently driving a pair of his own ponies;
but he’s a thief and he stole from me. This story is still to come; what
happened that evening was just a prelude: I sat for the whole two hours at
the corner of the table, and next to me all the while, on the left, was some
rotten little fop—a Yid, I think; he participates somewhere, however, even
writes something and gets it published. At the very last moment I suddenly
won twenty roubles. Two red banknotes lay in front of me, and suddenly I
see this little Yid reach out and quite calmly take one of my notes. I tried to
stop him, but he, with a most insolent air and without raising his voice in
the least, suddenly declares to me that it was his winnings, that he had just
staked and won; he even refused to continue the conversation and turned his
back. As if on purpose, I was in a most stupid state of mind at that moment:
I had conceived a grand idea, and so I spat, got up quickly, and walked
away, not even wanting to argue and making him a gift of the ten roubles.
And it would have been hard to carry on with this story of the insolent
pilferer, because the moment had been lost; the game had already gone
ahead. And that was a huge mistake on my part, which had its
consequences: three or four players next to us noticed our altercation and,

seeing me give up so easily, probably took me for the same sort. It was
exactly midnight; I went to another room, thought a bit, figured out a new
plan, and, returning, exchangd my notes for half-imperials. I was now in
possession of over forty pieces. I divided them into ten parts and decided to
stake on zéro ten times in a row, four half-imperials each time, one after
another. “If I win, I’m in luck; if I lose, so much the better; I’m never going
to play anymore.” I’ll note that zéro hadn’t come up even once in those two
hours, so that in the end nobody even staked on it.
I played standing up, silently frowning and clenching my teeth. On the
third stake, Zershchikov loudly announced zéro, which hadn’t come up all
day. They counted me out a hundred and forty half-imperials in gold. I still
had seven stakes left, and I went on, and meanwhile everything around me
began to spin and dance.
“Move over here!” I called the whole length of the table to one of the
players who had been sitting next to me earlier, a gray-haired man with a
big moustache and a purple face, wearing a tailcoat, who for several hours
already, with inexpressible patience, had been staking small sums and
losing time after time. “Move over here! The luck’s here!”
“Are you speaking to me?” the moustache responded with some sort of
menacing surprise from the other end of the table.
“Yes, you! You’ll lose everything over there!”
“It’s none of your business, and I beg you not to interfere with me!”
But I could no longer control myself. Across the table from me sat an
elderly officer. Looking at my pile, he murmured to his neighbor:
“Strange: zéro. No, I won’t venture on zéro .”
“Venture it, Colonel!” I cried, placing another stake.
“I beg you to leave me in peace as well, sir, without your advice,” he
snapped sharply. “You shout too much here.”

“I’m giving you good advice. Well, if you want to bet that zéro will come
up again right now—here, I’ll stake ten gold pieces, are you game?”
And I put up ten half-imperials.
“Bet ten gold pieces? That I can,” he said drily and sternly. “I bet you
that zéro won’t come up.”
“Ten louis d’ors, Colonel.”
“Ten louis d’ors?”
“Ten half-imperials, Colonel, or, in high style—louis d’ors.”
“Say half-imperials, then, and kindly do not joke with me.”
I certainly had no hope of winning the bet: there were thirty-six chances
to one that zéro wouldn’t come up; but I proposed it, first, because I was
showing off, and second, because I wanted to attract them all to me with
something. I could see very well that for some reason nobody there liked
me, and they took special pleasure in letting me know it. The roulette wheel
spun—and what was the general amazement when zéro came up again!
There was even a general outcry. Here the glory of winning befuddled me
completely. Again they counted me out a hundred and forty half-imperials.
Zershchikov asked me whether I wanted to take part of it in banknotes, but I
mumbled something in reply, because I literally could no longer express
myself calmly and coherently. My head was spinning, my legs were weak. I
suddenly felt that I was about to start taking awful risks; besides, I wanted
to undertake something else, propose another bet, count out a few thousand
to somebody. Mechanically, I raked in the little pile of banknotes and gold
pieces with my palm and couldn’t bring myself to count them. At that
moment I suddenly noticed the prince and Darzan behind me. They had just
come from their faro, having lost their shirts there, as I learned afterwards.
“Ah, Darzan,” I cried to him, “the luck’s here! Stake on zéro!”

“I’ve lost everything, I have no money,” he answered drily. And as for
the prince, it was as if he decidedly did not notice or recognize me.
“There’s money here!” I cried, pointing to my pile of gold. “How much
do you want?”
“Devil take it!” cried Darzan, turning all red. “I don’t believe I asked you
for money.”
“You’re being called,” Zershchikov pulled me by the sleeve.
I had been called, several times now and almost with curses, by the
colonel, who had lost a bet of ten imperials to me.
“Kindly take it!” he cried, all purple with anger. “I’m not obliged to stand
over you, and later you may say you didn’t get it. Count it up.”
“I trust you, I trust you, Colonel, without counting; only please don’t
shout at me like that and don’t be angry.” And I raked in his pile of gold
pieces with my hand.
“My dear sir, I beg you, get at someone else with your raptures, and not
at me,” the colonel shouted sharply. “I didn’t herd swine with you!”
“It’s strange to let such people in—who is he?—some youngster,” came
low-voiced exclamations.
But I wasn’t listening, I was staking at random, no longer on zéro. I
staked a whole wad of hundred-rouble notes on the first eighteen numbers.
“Let’s go, Darzan,” the prince’s voice came from behind me.
“Home?” I turned to them. “Wait for me, let’s leave together, I’m through
here.”
My stake won; it was a big win.

“Basta! ” I cried, and with trembling hands began raking up and pouring
gold into my pockets, without counting and somehow clumsily crumpling
the piles of banknotes with my fingers, wanting to stuff them all together
into my side pocket. Suddenly the plump, signet-ringed hand of Aferdov,
who was sitting next to me on the right and also staking large sums, reached
for my three hundred-rouble notes and covered them with his palm.
“Excuse me, sir, that is not yours,” he pronounced sternly and distinctly,
though in a rather soft voice.
That was the prelude which, a few days later, was destined to have such
consequences. Now I swear on my honor that those three hundred-rouble
notes were mine, but, to my ill fate, though I was certain they were mine, I
still had a lingering fraction of a doubt, and for an honest man that is
everything; and I am an honest man. Above all, I did not yet know for
certain then that Aferdov was a thief; I did not yet know his last name then,
so that at that moment I could actually think that I was mistaken and that
those three hundred-rouble notes were not among the ones just counted out
to me. I hadn’t counted my pile of money all the while and had only raked it
in with my hands, but money had also been lying in front of Aferdov all the
while, and right next to mine, albeit in good order and counted up. Finally,
Aferdov was known there, was considered a rich man, was treated with
respect. All this influenced me, and once again I didn’t protest. A terrible
mistake! The main swinishness consisted in the fact that I was in ecstasy.
“It’s a great pity that I don’t remember for certain, but it seems terribly
likely to me that it’s mine,” I said, my lips trembling with indignation.
These words at once aroused a murmur.
“In order to say such things, one needs to remember for certain, but you
yourself have been so good as to declare that you do not remember for
certain,” Aferdov said with insufferable haughtiness.
“But who is he?—but how can it be permitted?” came several
exclamations.

“It’s not the first time for him; earlier there was an incident with
Rechberg over a ten-rouble note,” some mean little voice said beside me.
“Well, enough, enough!” I exclaimed, “I won’t protest, take it! Prince . . .
where are the prince and Darzan? Gone? Gentlemen, did you see where the
prince and Darzan went?” and, having finally picked up all my money, and
holding in my hand several half-imperials I hadn’t had time to put in my
pocket, I started after the prince and Darzan. The reader can see, I believe,
that I’m not sparing myself and that I’m recollecting all of myself as I was
at that moment, to the last vileness, so that what came afterwards will be
understood.
The prince and Darzan had already gone downstairs, not paying the least
attention to my calls and cries. I caught up with them, but paused for a
second before the doorman and put three half-imperials in his hand, devil
knows why; he looked at me in perplexity and didn’t even thank me. But it
was all the same to me, and if Matvei had been there, I surely would have
dished out a whole fistful of gold pieces, and it seems that’s what I wanted
to do, but, running out to the porch, I suddenly recalled that I had dismissed
him earlier. At that moment the prince’s trotter drove up, and he got into the
sledge.
“I’m coming with you, Prince, to your place!” I cried, seized the flap and
flung it open so as to get into his sledge; but Darzan suddenly jumped into
the sledge past me, and the driver, tearing the flap from my hands, covered
the two gentlemen.
“Devil take it!” I cried in frenzy. It came out as if I had unfastened the
flap for Darzan, like a lackey.
“Home!” cried the prince.
“Stop!” I bellowed, clutching at the sledge, but the horse pulled, and I
tumbled into the snow. It even seemed to me that they laughed. Jumping up,
I instantly grabbed the first cab that came along and raced to the prince’s,
urging my nag on every second.

IV
AS IF ON PURPOSE, the nag crawled on for an unnaturally long time,
though I had promised a whole rouble. The driver kept whipping her up
and, of course, whipped her enough for a rouble. My heart was sinking; I
tried to start talking with the driver, but I couldn’t even get the words out,
and mumbled some sort of nonsense. That was the state I was in when I ran
up to the prince’s. He had just returned; he had taken Darzan home and was
alone. Pale and angry, he was pacing his study. I repeat once more: he had
lost terribly. He looked at me with some sort of distracted perplexity.
“You again!” he said, frowning.
“So as to have done with you, sir!” I said breathlessly. “How dared you
act that way with me?”
He looked at me questioningly.
“If you were going with Darzan, you might just have told me you were
going with Darzan, instead of which you started the horse, and I . . .”
“Ah, yes, it seems you fell in the snow,” and he laughed in my face.
“The response to that is a challenge, and therefore we shall first finish
with our accounts . . .”
And with a trembling hand I began taking my money out and placing it
on the sofa, on a little marble table, and even into some open book, in piles,
handfuls, wads; several coins rolled onto the carpet.
“Ah, yes, it seems you won? . . . One can tell it by your tone.”
Never before had he spoken so impudently with me. I was very pale.
“Here . . . I don’t know how much . . . has to be counted. I owe you up to
three thousand . . . or how much? . . . more or less?”

“I don’t believe I’m forcing you to pay.”
“No, sir, I myself want to pay, and you should know why. I know there’s
a thousand roubles in this wad—here!” And I started counting with
trembling hands, but stopped. “Never mind, I know it’s a thousand. So I’m
taking this thousand for myself, and all the rest, these piles, you can take for
my debt, part of my debt. I think there’s as much as two thousand here, or
maybe more!”
“But you’re still keeping a thousand for yourself ?” the prince bared his
teeth.
“Do you need it? In that case . . . I wanted . . . I thought you wouldn’t
want . . . but if you need it—here . . .”
“No, no need,” he turned away from me contemptuously and again began
pacing the room.
“And devil knows what makes you pay it back,” he suddenly turned to
me with a frightful challenge in his face.
“I’m paying it back in order to demand an accounting from you!” I yelled
in my turn.
“Get out of here with your eternal words and gestures!” He suddenly
stamped his feet at me as if in frenzy. “I wanted to throw you out long ago,
you and your Versilov.”
“You’re out of your mind!” I cried. And it did look like it.
“The two of you have worn me out with your catchy phrases, nothing but
phrases, phrases, phrases! About honor, for instance! Pah! I’ve long wanted
to break . . . I’m glad, glad that the moment has come. I considered myself
bound, and I blushed at being obliged to receive you . . . both! But now I
don’t consider myself bound by anything, not by anything, know that! Your
Versilov set me on to attack Mme. Akhmakov and disgrace her . . . Don’t

you dare speak to me about honor after that. Because you’re dishonorable
people . . . both, both! And weren’t you ashamed to take money from me?”
Everything went dark in my eyes.
“I took it from you as a comrade,” I began terribly softly. “You yourself
offered, and I trusted in your goodwill . . .”
“I’m not your comrade! I didn’t give you money for that, and you
yourself know what it was for.”
“I took it against Versilov’s money; of course, it was stupid, but I . . .”
“You couldn’t have taken it against Versilov’s money without his
permission, and I couldn’t have given you his money without his
permission . . . I gave you my own, and you knew it—knew it and took it—
and I suffered this hateful comedy in my own house!”
“What did I know? What comedy? Why did you give me the money?”
“Pour vos beaux yeux, mon cousin!”43 he guffawed right in my face.
“Ah, the devil!” I yelled, “take all of it, here’s the thousand for you!
We’re quits now, and tomorrow . . .”
And I hurled the wad of banknotes at him that I had been keeping for my
further needs. The wad hit him right in the waistcoat and dropped to the
floor. In three huge strides, he quickly came up close to me.
“Do you dare to tell me,” he said ferociously and distinctly, syllable by
syllable, “that while you were taking my money all this month, you didn’t
know that your sister is pregnant by me?”
“What? How?” I cried, and my legs suddenly became weak, and I sank
strengthlessly onto the sofa. He himself told me later that I literally turned
as pale as a sheet. My mind became addled. I remember we went on gazing
silently into each other’s faces. Fear seemed to pass over his face; he

suddenly bent down, seized me by the shoulders, and began to support me. I
remember very well his fixed smile; there was mistrust and astonishment in
it. No! He had never expected his words would have such an effect, because
he was convinced of my guilt.
It ended with my fainting, but only for a minute; I recovered, got to my
feet, gazed at him and reflected—and suddenly the whole truth was
revealed to my long-sleeping reason! If someone had told me beforehand
and asked, “What would you do to him at that moment?” I would probably
have answered that I would tear him to pieces. But something quite
different took place, and totally beyond my will: I suddenly covered my
face with both hands, and wept and sobbed bitterly. It came out that way of
itself! The little child suddenly betrayed himself in the young man. Which
meant that the little child was still living in my soul by a whole half. I fell
on the sofa weeping. “Liza! Liza! Poor, unfortunate girl!” The prince
suddenly and completely believed me.
“God, how guilty I am before you!” he cried in deep sorrow. “Oh, what
vile thoughts I had of you in my suspiciousness . . . Forgive me, Arkady
Makarovich!”
I suddenly jumped up, wanted to say something to him, stood in front of
him, but, having said nothing, ran out of the room and out of the house. I
plodded home on foot and barely remember the way. I threw myself on my
bed, buried my face in the pillow, in the darkness, and thought and thought.
At such moments one’s thinking is never orderly and consistent. It was as if
the thread of my mind and imagination kept snapping, and, I remember, I
would even start dreaming of something totally irrelevant and even of God
knows what. But grief and calamity would suddenly come back to my mind
with pain and heartache, and I would wring my hands again and exclaim,
“Liza, Liza!” and weep again. I don’t remember how I fell asleep, but I
slept soundly, sweetly.

Chapter Seven
I
I WOKE UP in the morning at around eight o’clock, instantly locked my
door, sat by the window, and started to think. I sat like that until ten o’clock.
The maid knocked at my door twice, but I sent her away. Finally, between
ten and eleven, there came another knock. I shouted again, but it was Liza.
Along with her the maid came in, brought me coffee, and set about lighting
the stove. To send the maid away was impossible, and all the while Fekla
was putting in the wood and blowing up the fire, I paced my small room
with big strides, not starting a conversation and even trying not to look at
Liza. The maid worked with inexpressible slowness, and that on purpose, as
all maids do in such cases, when they notice that their presence is keeping
the masters from talking. Liza sat on a chair by the window and watched
me.
“Your coffee will get cold,” she said suddenly.
I looked at her: not the least embarrassment, perfect calm, and even a
smile on her lips.
“Women!” I couldn’t stand it and heaved my shoulders. Finally the maid
got the stove lighted and began tidying up, but I hotly chased her out and
locked the door at last.
“Tell me, please, why you locked the door again?” asked Liza.
I planted myself in front of her:
“Liza, I would never have thought you could deceive me like this!” I
exclaimed suddenly, not even thinking at all that I would begin that way,
and it was not tears this time, but almost some sort of spiteful feeling that
suddenly stung my heart, so much so that I didn’t even expect it. Liza

blushed, yet did not answer, but only went on looking me straight in the
eye.
“Wait, Liza, wait, oh, how stupid I was! But was I? The hints all came
together into one heap only yesterday, and before that how could I have
known? From the fact that you went to see Mrs. Stolbeev and this . . . Darya
Onisimovna? But I looked upon you as the sun, Liza, and how could
anything have occurred to me? Remember how I met you that time, two
months ago, in his apartment, and how we walked in the sun then and
rejoiced . . . was it already then? Was it?”
She responded by inclining her head affirmatively.
“So you were already deceiving me then! Here it’s not from my stupidity,
Liza, the reason here is sooner my egoism, not stupidity, my heart’s egoism
and—and, perhaps, the certainty of your holiness. Oh, I was always certain
that you were all infinitely higher than I, and—now look! Finally, yesterday,
in the course of one day, I didn’t manage to figure it out, despite all the
indications . . . But that’s not at all what I was occupied with yesterday!”
Here I suddenly remembered Katerina Nikolaevna, and again something
stung my heart painfully, as with a pin, and I blushed all over. Naturally, I
couldn’t be kind at that moment.
“But why are you justifying yourself? It seems you’re in a hurry to justify
yourself for something, Arkady—what is it?” Liza asked softly and meekly,
but in a very firm and convinced voice.
“What is it? Why, what am I to do now?—there’s at least that question!
And you say ‘what is it?’ I don’t know how to act! I don’t know how
brothers act on such occasions . . . I know marriages can be forced with a
pistol in the hand . . . I’ll act as an honorable man should! But, you see, I
don’t know how an honorable man should act here! . . . Why? Because
we’re not nobility, but he’s a prince and is making his career; he won’t
listen to us honorable people. We’re not even brother and sister, but some
sort of illegitimates, without a family name, a household serf’s children. Do

princes marry household serfs? Oh, how vile! And, on top of that, you sit
there and get surprised at me.”
“I believe that you’re suffering,” Liza blushed again, “but you’re in a
rush and make yourself suffer.”
“In a rush? So I’m really not behind enough, in your opinion! Is it for
you, for you, Liza, to speak to me like that?” I got carried away, finally, by
total indignation. “And how much disgrace I endured, and how this prince
must have despised me! Oh, it’s all clear to me now, and the whole picture
stands before me: he fully imagined that I had guessed about his liaison
with you long ago, but that I was keeping quiet or even putting on airs and
boasting about ‘honor’—he might even have thought that of me! And that I
was taking money for my sister, for my sister’s disgrace! That’s what he
found so repulsive to see, and I fully justify him: to see and receive a
scoundrel every day, because he’s her brother, and what’s more, he talks
about honor . . . it could make the heart wither, even his heart! And you
allowed all that, you didn’t warn me! He despised me so much that he
talked about me with Stebelkov, and yesterday he told me himself that he
wanted to throw both me and Versilov out. And that Stebelkov! ‘Anna
Andreevna is as much a sister to you as Lizaveta Makarovna,’ and then he
shouts after me: ‘My money’s better.’ And me, me, sprawling insolently on
his sofas and foisting myself on his acquaintances as an equal, devil take
them! And you allowed all that! Perhaps Darzan knows now, too, at least
judging by his tone yesterday evening . . . Everybody, everybody knows,
except me!”
“Nobody knows anything, he hasn’t and couldn’t have told any of his
acquaintances,” Liza interrupted me, “and about this Stebelkov I know only
that Stebelkov torments him, and that this Stebelkov could only have
guessed it . . . And I told him about you several times, and he believed me
completely that you didn’t know anything, and I simply don’t know why
and how it came out between you yesterday.”
“Oh, at least I paid him back yesterday, and that’s a load off my heart
anyway! Liza, does mama know? But how could she not know? Yesterday,

yesterday, how she rose up against me! . . . Ah, Liza! Can it be that you
consider yourself right in decidedly everything, that you don’t blame
yourself the tiniest bit? I don’t know how these things are judged nowadays
and of what thoughts you are—that is, as regards me, mama, your brother,
your father . . . Does Versilov know?”
“Mama hasn’t said anything to him; he doesn’t ask; it must be that he
doesn’t want to ask.”
“He knows, but he doesn’t want to know, that’s so, that’s like him! Well,
you can make fun of your brother’s role, your stupid brother, talking about
pistols, but your mother, your mother! Can it be that you didn’t think, Liza,
how this is a reproach to mama? I was suffering over that all night. Mama’s
first thought will be, ‘It’s because I was also guilty, and like mother, like
daughter!’”
“Oh, how spitefully and cruelly you said that!” Liza cried with tears
bursting from her eyes, got up, and went quickly towards the door.
“Wait, wait!” I caught hold of her, sat her back down, and sat down
beside her, my arm still around her.
“I just thought it would all be like this, as I was coming here, and that
you were sure to want to make sure that I acknowledge my guilt. As you
wish, I acknowledge it. It was only out of pride that I was silent just now
and didn’t say anything, but I pity you and mama much more than I do
myself . . .” She didn’t finish, and suddenly burst into hot tears.
“Come, Liza, don’t, don’t say anything. I’m not your judge. Liza, how is
mama? Tell me, has she known for long?”
“I think so; but I told her myself not long ago, when this happened,” she
said quietly, lowering her eyes.
“And what did she say?”
“She said, ‘Keep it!’” Liza said still more softly.

“Ah, yes, Liza, ‘keep it’! Don’t do anything to yourself, God forbid!”
“I won’t,” she replied firmly and again raised her eyes to me. “Don’t
worry,” she added, “that’s not it at all.”
“Liza, dear, I see only that I don’t know anything here, but instead I’ve
only now found out how much I love you. There’s only one thing I don’t
understand, Liza: it’s all clear to me, there’s only one thing I can’t
understand at all: what makes you love him? How could you have fallen in
love with such a man? That’s the question!”
“And you probably also suffered over that at night?” Liza smiled gently.
“Wait, Liza, it’s a stupid question, and you’re laughing; laugh, then, but
it’s impossible not to be surprised: you and he are such opposites! He—I’ve
studied him—he’s gloomy, suspicious, maybe he’s very kind, let it be so,
but he’s highly inclined to see evil in everything first of all (in that,
however, he’s quite like me!). He passionately respects nobility—I admit
that, I see it—but only, it seems, in the ideal. Oh, he’s inclined to
repentance, he spends all his life constantly blaming himself and repenting,
but on the other hand he never improves; however, maybe that’s also like
me. A thousand prejudices and false thoughts and—no thoughts at all! He
seeks a great deed and does dirty little tricks. Forgive me, Liza, anyhow I’m
a fool: I say this, I hurt you and know it; I understand that . . .”
“The portrait would be true,” Liza smiled, “but you’re too angry with
him over me, and therefore none of it is true. He’s been mistrustful of you
from the beginning, and you couldn’t see the whole of him, but with me
even in Luga . . . He’s seen only me alone, ever since Luga. Yes, he’s
suspicious and morbid, and without me he would have lost his mind; and if
he leaves me, he will lose his mind or shoot himself; it seems he’s realized
that and knows it,” Liza added as if to herself and pensively. “Yes, he’s
constantly weak, but these weak ones are occasionally capable of doing
something very strong . . . How strangely you said that about the pistol,
Arkady; there’s no need for any of that, and I know what will happen
myself. It’s not I who am after him, but he who is after me. Mama weeps,

she says, ‘If you marry him, you’ll be unhappy, he’ll stop loving you.’ I
don’t believe that. Maybe I’ll be unhappy, but he won’t stop loving me.
That’s not why I haven’t accepted him all along, but for another reason. For
two months now I haven’t given him my acceptance, but today I told him,
‘Yes, I’ll marry you.’ Arkasha, you know, yesterday” (her eyes shone and
she suddenly put her arms around my neck), “yesterday he went to Anna
Andreevna and told her directly, in all sincerity, that he couldn’t love her . .
. Yes, he gave a complete explanation, and that thought is now finished! He
never had any part in that thought, it was all dreamed up by Prince Nikolai
Ivanovich, and those tormentors, Stebelkov and another one, kept pushing
him . . . And so for that I said yes to him today. Dear Arkady, he’s calling
for you very much, and don’t be offended with him for yesterday; he’s not
feeling well today, and will be at home all day. He’s really unwell, Arkady,
don’t think it’s a pretext. He sent me specially and asked me to tell you that
he ‘needs’ you, that he has much to tell you, and it wouldn’t be convenient
here in this apartment. Well, good-bye! Ah, Arkady, I’m ashamed even to
say it, but as I was coming here, I was terribly afraid that you had stopped
loving me, I kept crossing myself on the way, but—you’re so kind, so
sweet! I’ll never forget it! I’m going to see mama. And you try to love him
a little, hm?”
I embraced her warmly and told her:
“I think, Liza, that you’re a strong character. Yes, I believe it’s not you
who are after him, but he who is after you, only still . . .”
“Only still, ‘What makes you love him—that’s the question!’” Liza
picked up with a suddenly mischievous smile, as she used to, and said
“that’s the question!” terribly like me. And what’s more, exactly as I do
with this phrase, she raised her index finger in front of her. We kissed each
other, but when she left, my heart was wrung again.

II
I’LL NOTE HERE just for myself : there were, for instance, moments after
Liza left when a whole crowd of the most unexpected thoughts came to my

head, and I was even very pleased with them. “Well, why do I fuss so,” I
thought, “what is it to me? It’s the same with everyone, or almost. So what
if it happened with Liza? Do I have to save ‘the family honor’ or what?” I
mark all these meannesses in order to show how poorly fortified I was in
the understanding of evil and good. The only saving thing was feeling: I
knew that Liza was unhappy, that mama was unhappy, and I knew it
through feeling, when I remembered about them, and therefore I felt that all
that had happened must not be good.
Now I’ll state beforehand that from this day right up to the catastrophe of
my illness, events raced on so quickly that, recalling them now, I’m even
surprised myself at how I could hold out against them, how fate failed to
crush me. They weakened my mind and even my feelings, and if, in the
end, I hadn’t held out and had committed a crime (and a crime almost was
committed), the jury might very well have acquitted me. But I will try to
describe it all in strict order, though I tell you beforehand that there was
little order in my thoughts then. Events came pressing like the wind, and
thoughts whirled in my mind like dry leaves in autumn. Since I consisted
entirely of other people’s thoughts, where could I get my own, when I
needed them for an independent decision? And I had no guide at all.
I decided to go to see the prince in the evening, so that we could discuss
everything in perfect freedom, and until evening I stayed at home. But at
twilight I again received a note from Stebelkov by the city mail, three lines,
with an insistent and “earnest” request to call on him the next morning at
around eleven o’clock on “most important business, and you will see
yourself that it is business.” Having thought it over, I decided to act
according to the circumstances, since tomorrow was still a long way off.
It was already eight o’clock. I would have left long ago, but I kept
waiting for Versilov; there was much I wanted to express to him, and my
heart was burning. But Versilov wouldn’t come and didn’t come. For the
time being I couldn’t show myself at mama’s and Liza’s, and I had a feeling
that Versilov probably hadn’t been there all day. I went on foot, and it
occurred to me on the way to peek into yesterday’s tavern on the canal.
Versilov happened to be sitting in yesterday’s place.

“I just thought you’d come here,” he said, smiling strangely and looking
at me strangely. His smile was unkind, such as I hadn’t seen on his face in a
long time.
I sat down at his table and first told him all the facts about the prince and
Liza from the beginning, and about my scene yesterday at the prince’s after
the roulette; and I didn’t forget my winning at roulette. He listened very
attentively and asked again about the prince’s decision to marry Liza.
“Pauvre enfant, maybe she won’t gain anything by that. But most likely
it won’t happen . . . though he’s capable . . .”
“Tell me, as a friend: you did know about it, you had a presentiment?”
“My friend, what could I do here? It’s all a matter of feelings and another
person’s conscience, if only on the side of this poor little girl. I repeat to
you: I did enough poking into other people’s consciences once upon a time
—it’s a most inconvenient maneuver! I won’t refuse to help in misfortune,
as much as my strength allows and if I can sort it out myself. And you, my
dear, you really suspected nothing all the while?”
“But how could you,” I cried, flushing all over, “how could you, with
even a drop of suspicion that I knew about Liza’s liaison with the prince,
and seeing that at the same time I was taking the prince’s money—how
could you talk to me, sit with me, offer me your hand—me, whom you
should have considered a scoundrel! Because I bet you certainly suspected
that I knew everything and was knowingly taking the prince’s money for
my sister!”
“Once again it’s a matter of conscience,” he smiled. “And how do you
know,” he added distinctly, with a certain enigmatic feeling, “how do you
know that I wasn’t afraid, too, like you yesterday on a different occasion, to
lose my ‘ideal’ and, instead of my ardent and honest boy, to confront a
blackguard? Fearing it, I postponed the moment. Why not suppose in me,
instead of laziness or perfidy, something more innocent, well, stupid
perhaps, but of a more noble sort? Que diable! I’m all too often stupid and
without nobility. What use would you be to me, if you had the same

inclinations? To persuade and reform in such cases is mean; you’d have lost
all value in my eyes, even if you were reformed . . .”
“And Liza—are you sorry, are you sorry for her?”
“Very sorry, my dear. What makes you think I’m so unfeeling? . . . On
the contrary, I’ll try as hard as I can . . . Well, and how are you? How are
your affairs?”
“Let’s leave my affairs out of it; I have no affairs of my own now. Listen,
why do you doubt that he’ll marry her? Yesterday he was at Anna
Andreevna’s and positively renounced . . . well, I mean, that a stupid idea . .
. conceived by Prince Nikolai Ivanovich—to get them married. He
renounced it positively.”
“Oh? When was that? And from whom precisely did you hear it?” he
inquired with curiosity. I told him all I knew.
“Hm . . .” he said pensively and as if figuring something out for himself,
“meaning that it happened precisely an hour . . . before a certain other talk.
Hm . . . well, yes, of course, such a talk could have taken place between
them . . . though, incidentally, I’m informed that so far nothing has been
said or done on one side or the other . . . Of course, two words are enough
for such a talk. But, look here,” he suddenly smiled strangely, “I have a
piece of quite extraordinary information, which will, of course, interest you
right now: even if your prince had made a proposal to Anna Andreevna
yesterday (which I, suspecting about Liza, would have done everything in
my power to prevent, entre nous soit dit44), Anna Andreevna would
certainly and in any case have refused him at once. You seem to love Anna
Andreevna very much, to respect and value her? That’s very nice on your
part, and therefore you will probably be very glad for her: she’s getting
married, my dear, and, judging by her character, it seems she will certainly
get married, and I—well, I, of course, will give her my blessing.”
“Getting married? To whom?” I cried, terribly surprised.

“Try to guess. But I won’t torment you: to Prince Nikolai Ivanovich, your
dear old man.”
I stared at him all eyes.
“She must have been nursing this idea for a long time, and, of course, she
worked it out artistically on all sides,” he went on lazily and distinctly. “I
suppose it happened exactly an hour after the visit of ‘Prince Seryozha.’
(See how inopportunely he came galloping!) She simply went to Prince
Nikolai Ivanovich and made him a proposal.”
“How, ‘made him a proposal’? You mean he proposed to her?”
“He? Come now! It was she, she herself. That’s just it, that he’s perfectly
delighted. They say he sits there now, surprised at how it hadn’t occurred to
him. I’ve heard he’s even slightly ill . . . also from delight, it must be.”
“Listen, you speak so mockingly . . . I almost can’t believe it. And how
could she propose? What did she say?”
“Rest assured, my friend, that I’m sincerely glad,” he replied, suddenly
assuming a terribly serious air. “He’s old, of course, but he can marry,
according to all laws and customs, while she—here again it’s a matter of
another person’s conscience, something I’ve already repeated to you, my
friend. However, she’s more than competent enough to arrive at her own
view and her own decision. As for the details proper and the words in which
she expressed it, I’m unable to tell you, my friend. But she, of course, was
able to do it, and maybe in a way such as you and I would never have come
up with. The best thing in all this is that there’s no scandal involved,
everything’s très comme il faut45 in the world’s eyes. Of course, it’s only
too clear that she wanted a position for herself in the world, but then, too,
she deserves it. All this, my friend, is a completely worldly thing. And she
must have proposed splendidly and gracefully. She’s a stern type, my
friend, a girl-nun, as you once defined her; a ‘calm young lady,’ as I’ve long
been calling her. She’s almost his ward, you know, and has seen his
kindness towards her more than once. She’s been assuring me for a long

time now that she ‘so respects and values, so pities and sympathizes with
him,’ well, and all the rest, that I was even partly prepared. I was told of it
all this morning, on her behalf and at her request, by my son and her
brother, Andrei Andreevich, with whom it seems you’re not acquainted, and
with whom I meet regularly twice a year. He respectfully approbates her
step.”
“Then it’s already public? God, I’m so amazed!”
“No, it’s not public at all yet, not for some time . . . I don’t know about
them, generally I’m quite outside of it. But it’s all true.”
“But now Katerina Nikolaevna . . . What do you think, is Bjoring going
to like this little snack?”
“That I don’t know . . . what, essentially, there is for him not to like; but,
believe me, Anna Andreevna is a highly decent person in that sense as well.
And what a one she is, though, this Anna Andreevna! Yesterday morning,
just before that, she inquired of me whether I was or was not in love with
the widow Akhmakov! Remember, I told you that yesterday with surprise:
she wouldn’t be able to marry the father if I married the daughter. Do you
understand now?”
“Ah, indeed!” I cried. “But can it be, indeed, that Anna Andreevna
supposed you . . . might wish to marry Katerina Nikolaevna?”
“It looks that way, my friend, however . . . however, it seems it’s time
you went wherever you’re going. You see, I keep having these headaches.
I’ll tell them to play Lucia. I love the solemnity of boredom—however, I’ve
already told you that . . . I repeat myself unpardonably . . . However, maybe
I’ll leave here. I love you, my dear, but good-bye; when I have a headache
or a toothache, I always yearn for solitude.”
Some tormented wrinkle appeared on his face; I believe now that his
head did ache then, his head especially . . .
“See you tomorrow,” I said.

“What about tomorrow, what’s happening tomorrow?” he smiled
crookedly.
“I’ll come to you, or you to me.”
“No, I won’t come to you, but you’ll come running to me . . .” There was
something all too unkind in his face, but I had other things to think about:
such an event!

III
THE PRINCE WAS actually unwell and was sitting at home alone, his head
wrapped in a wet towel. He was waiting very much for me; but it was not
his head alone that ached, but rather he ached all over morally. Again I’ll
state beforehand: all this time lately, and right up to the catastrophe, I was
somehow forced to meet nothing but people who were so agitated that they
were almost crazy, so that I myself must have been as if involuntarily
infected. I confess, I came with bad feelings, and I was very ashamed that I
had burst into tears in front of him the day before. And anyway he and Liza
had managed to deceive me so skillfully that I couldn’t help seeing myself
as a fool. In short, when I went in, there were false strings sounding in my
soul. But all that was affected and false quickly dropped away. I must do
him justice: as soon as his suspiciousness fell and broke to pieces, he gave
himself definitively, displaying features of an almost infantile affection,
trustfulness, and love. He kissed me tearfully and at once began talking
business . . . Yes, he really needed me very much; there was an extremely
great disorder in his words and flow of ideas.
He announced to me quite firmly his intention to marry Liza and as soon
as possible. “That she’s not of the nobility, believe me, has never
embarrassed me for a moment,” he said to me. “My grandfather was
married to a household serf, a singer from a neighboring landowner’s
private serf theater. Of course, my family nursed some hopes in my regard,
but they’ll have to give in now, and there won’t be any struggle. I want to
break, to break with the whole present definitively! Everything will be
different, everything will be in a new way! I don’t understand what makes

your sister love me; but, of course, without her maybe I wouldn’t be living
in the world now. I swear to you from the bottom of my heart that I now
look at my meeting her in Luga as at the finger of Providence. I think she
loves me for the ‘boundlessness of my fall’ . . . though, can you understand
that, Arkady Makarovich?”
“Perfectly!” I said in a highly convinced voice. I was sitting in an
armchair by the table, and he was pacing the room.
“I must tell you this whole fact of our meeting without reserve. It began
with my soul’s secret, which she alone has learned, because she’s the only
one I’ve ventured to entrust it to. And to this day no one else knows it. I
found myself in Luga then with despair in my soul and was living at Mrs.
Stolbeev’s, I don’t know why, maybe I was seeking the most complete
solitude. At that time I had just retired from service in the ———regiment.
I had entered that regiment when I came back from abroad, after that
meeting abroad with Andrei Petrovich. I had money then, I squandered it in
the regiment, lived openhandedly; but my officer comrades didn’t like me,
though I tried not to insult anyone. And I confess to you that no one has
ever liked me. There was an ensign there, Stepanov or something, I confess
to you, an extremely empty, worthless, and even as if downtrodden man, in
short, not distinguished by anything. Indisputably honest, however. He
began calling on me, I wasn’t ceremonious with him, he spent whole days
sitting in the corner of my room, silently but with dignity, though he didn’t
bother me at all. Once I told him a certain current anecdote, which I
embellished with a lot of nonsense, such as that the colonel’s daughter was
not indifferent to me and that the colonel, who was counting on me, would
of course do whatever I liked . . . In short, I’ll omit the details, but from all
this later came a very complex and vile piece of gossip. It came not from
Stepanov, but from my orderly, who had been eavesdropping and
remembered everything, because it involved an anecdote compromising to
the young lady. When the gossip went around, this orderly, at the officers’
interrogation, pointed the finger at Stepanov, that is, that I had told it to this
Stepanov. Stepanov was put in such a position that he simply couldn’t deny
having heard it; it was a matter of honor. And since I had lied for two-thirds
of the anecdote, the officers were indignant, and the regimental commander,

summoning us to him, was forced to have it out. It was here that the
question was put to Stepanov in front of everyone: had he or had he not
heard it? And the man told the whole truth. Well, sir, what did I do then, I, a
thousand-year prince? I denied it and told Stepanov to his face that he was
lying, told him politely, that is, in the sense that he had ‘misunderstood’ it,
and so on . . . Again, I’ll omit the details, but the advantage of my position
was that, since Stepanov frequented me, I could present the matter, not
without some probability, so that it would look as if he had connived with
my orderly with a view to some advantage. Stepanov only looked at me
silently and shrugged. I remember his look and will never forget it. Then he
immediately sent in his resignation, but what do you think happened? The
officers, all of them at once, to a man, paid him a visit and persuaded him
not to resign. Two weeks later I also left the regiment. Nobody drove me
out, nobody asked me to leave, I gave family circumstances as a pretext.
That was the end of the matter. At first I was perfectly all right and was
even angry with them; I lived in Luga, made the acquaintance of Lizaveta
Makarovna, but then, a month later, I began looking at my revolver and
thinking about death. I look at everything darkly, Arkady Makarovich. I
prepared a letter to the regimental commander and my comrades, with a full
confession of my lie, restoring Stepanov’s honor. Having written the letter, I
posed myself a problem: ‘Send it and live, or send it and die?’ I wouldn’t
have been able to resolve this problem. Chance, blind chance, after one
quick and strange conversation with Lizaveta Makarovna, suddenly brought
us close. Before then she had come to see Mrs. Stolbeev; we met, greeted
each other, and even spoke occasionally. I suddenly revealed everything to
her. And it was then that she gave me her hand.”
“How did she resolve the problem?”
“I didn’t send the letter. She decided against sending it. She motivated it
like this: if I did send the letter, I would, of course, be committing a noble
act, enough to wash away all the dirt and even much more, but could I bear
it myself? Her opinion was that no one could bear it, because the future
would be ruined then, and resurrection into a new life would be impossible.
And besides, it would have been one thing if Stepanov had suffered; but he

had been vindicated by all the officers without that. In short—a paradox;
but she held me back, and I gave myself to her completely.”
“She resolved it in a Jesuitical way, but like a woman!” I cried. “She
already loved you then!”
“And with that I was reborn into a new life. I gave myself a promise to
remake myself, to change my life, to be worthy of it before myself and
before her, and—look what we ended with! It ended with you and me going
to the roulette houses, playing faro; I couldn’t stand up to the inheritance,
was glad for my career, all these people, the trotters . . . I tormented Liza—a
disgrace!”
He rubbed his forehead with his hand and paced the room.
“You and I have been overtaken by the same Russian fate, Arkady
Makarovich: you don’t know what to do, and I don’t know what to do.
Once a Russian man gets slightly out of the ordinary rut that custom lays
down for him—he immediately doesn’t know what to do. In the rut,
everything is clear: income, rank, position in the world, equipage, visits,
service, wife—but the slightest something, and what am I? A leaf driven by
the wind. I don’t know what to do! These two months I’ve stuggled to keep
in the rut, I’ve come to love the rut, I’ve been drawn into the rut. You still
don’t know all the depths of my fall here: I loved Liza, sincerely loved her,
and at the same time had thoughts of Mme. Akhmakov!”
“Is it possible?” I cried in pain. “By the way, Prince, what did you tell me
yesterday about Versilov, that he set you on to some sort of meanness
against Katerina Nikolaevna?”
“Maybe I exaggerated and am as guilty in my suspiciousness before him
as before you. Let’s drop that. What, can you really think that for all this
time, ever since Luga, I haven’t been nursing a lofty ideal of life? I swear to
you, it never left me and was with me constantly, not losing the least of its
beauty in my soul. I remembered the oath I had given Lizaveta Makarovna
to be reborn. Andrei Petrovich, speaking here yesterday about nobility,
didn’t say anything new to me, I assure you. My ideal was firmly

established: a few score acres of land (and only a few score, because I
already have almost nothing left of the inheritance); then a complete, the
most complete, break with society and career; a house in the country, a
family, and myself—a plowman or something of the sort. Oh, in our family
it’s nothing new; my father’s brother plowed with his own hands, so did my
grandfather. We’re only thousand-year-old princes and as noble as the
Rohans,24 but we’re paupers. And this is what I’d teach my children:
‘Always remember all your life that you are a nobleman, that the sacred
blood of Russian princes flows in your veins, but do not be ashamed that
your father plowed the earth himself: he did it like a prince.’ I wouldn’t
leave them any fortune except for this piece of land, but instead I’d give
them a higher education, I’d consider it my duty. Oh, here Liza could help
me. Liza, the children, work—oh, how we both dreamed of it all, dreamed
of it here, right in these rooms, and what then? At the same time I had
thoughts of Mme. Akhmakov, without loving this person at all, and of the
possibility of a wealthy society marriage! And only after the news
Nashchokin brought yesterday, about this Bjoring, did I decide to go to
Anna Andreevna.”
“But didn’t you go to renounce her? That was already an honorable act, I
think.”
“You think so?” he stopped in front of me. “No, you still don’t know my
nature! Or . . . or there’s something here that I don’t know myself, because
here, it must be, there’s not just nature. I love you sincerely, Arkady
Makarovich, and, besides that, I’ve been deeply guilty before you for all
these two months, and therefore I want you, as Liza’s brother, to know
everything: I went to propose to Anna Andreevna, and not to renounce her.”
“Can it be? But Liza said . . .”
“I deceived Liza.”
“I beg your pardon: you made a formal proposal and Anna Andreevna
refused you? Is that it? Is that it? The details are extremely important for
me, Prince.”

“No, I didn’t make any proposal, but only because I had no time; she let
me know beforehand—not directly, of course, but nevertheless in very
transparent and clear terms, she ‘delicately’ gave me to understand that the
idea was henceforth impossible.”
“That means it’s the same as if you didn’t make the proposal, and your
pride hasn’t suffered!”
“How can you possibly reason like that! And the judgment of my own
conscience? And Liza, whom I deceived and . . . therefore wanted to
abandon? And the vow I made to myself and all the generations of my
ancestors—to be reborn and to redeem all my former baseness! I beg you
not to tell her about it. Maybe it’s the one thing she’d be unable to forgive
me! I’ve been sick since that business yesterday. And the main thing is that
it’s all over now, and the last of the Princes Sokolsky will go to hard labor.
Poor Liza! I’ve been waiting all day for you, Arkady Makarovich, to reveal
to you, as Liza’s brother, something she doesn’t know yet. I am a criminal
and a partner in the counterfeiting of shares in the ——sky railroad.”
“What’s this now! Why to hard labor?” I jumped up, looking at him in
horror. His face expressed the most deep, dark, and hopeless grief.
“Sit down,” he said, and sat down himself in the facing armchair. “First
of all, learn this fact: a little over a year ago, that same summer of Ems,
Lydia and Katerina Nikolaevna, and then Paris, precisely at the time when I
went to Paris for two months, in Paris, of course, I didn’t have enough
money. Just then Stebelkov turned up, whom, incidentally, I had known
before. He gave me some money and promised to give more, but for his
part also asked me to help him: he had need of an artist, a draftsman, an
engraver, a lithographer, and so on, a chemist, and a technician—and all
that for certain purposes. About the purposes, even from the first, he spoke
quite transparently. And what then? He knew my character—all this only
made me laugh. The thing was that since my schooldays I had been
acquainted with a certain man, at the present time a Russian émigré, not of
Russian origin, however, and living somewhere in Hamburg. In Russia he
had already been mixed up once in a story to do with forged documents. It

was this man Stebelkov was counting on, but he needed a recommendation,
and he turned to me. I gave him two lines and forgot about it at once. Later
he met me once more and then again, and I got as much as three thousand
from him then. I literally forgot about this whole affair. Here I kept taking
money from him on promissory notes and pledges, and he twisted before
me like a slave, and suddenly yesterday I find out from him for the first
time that I’m a criminal.”
“When yesterday?”
“Yesterday morning, when we were shouting in my study before
Nashchokin’s arrival. For the first time, and perfectly clearly now, he dared
to bring up Anna Andreevna with me. I raised my hand to strike him, but he
suddenly stood up and announced to me that I was solidary with him and
that I should remember that I was a partner and as much of a swindler as he
—in short, that was the idea, though not in those words.”
“What nonsense, but is this a dream?”
“No, it’s not a dream. He was here today and explained in more detail.
These shares have been circulating for a long time, and more are going to
be put into circulation, but it seems they’ve already begun to be picked up
here and there. Of course, I’m on the sidelines, but ‘all the same, you kindly
furnished that letter then, sir’—that’s what Stebelkov told me.”
“But you didn’t know what it was for, or did you?”
“I knew,” the prince replied softly and lowered his eyes. “That is, you
see, I knew and didn’t know. I laughed, I found it funny. I didn’t think about
anything then, the less so as I had no need at all for counterfeit shares and it
wasn’t I who was going to make them. But, all the same, the three thousand
he gave me then, he didn’t even set down to my account afterwards, and I
allowed that. And, anyway, how do you know, maybe I, too, was a
counterfeiter? I couldn’t help knowing—I’m not a child; I knew, but I found
it amusing, and so I helped scoundrels and jailbirds . . . and did it for
money! Which means that I, too, am a counterfeiter!”

“Oh, you’re exaggerating; you were wrong, but you’re exaggerating!”
“Above all, there’s a certain Zhibelsky here, still a young man, in the
legal line, something like a lawyer’s assistant. He was also some sort of
partner in these shares, and later he came to me from that gentleman in
Hamburg, with trifles, naturally, and I didn’t even know why myself, there
was no mention of shares . . . But, anyhow, he saved two documents written
in my hand, both two-line notes, and, of course, they are also evidence;
today I understood that very well. Stebelkov explains that this Zhibelsky is
hindering everything: he stole something there, somebody’s money, public
money, it seems, but he intends to steal more and then to emigrate; so he
needs eight thousand, not less, to help him emigrate. My share of the
inheritance satisfies Stebelkov, but Stebelkov says that Zhibelsky also has
to be satisfied . . . In short, I must give up my share of the inheritance, plus
ten thousand more—that’s their final word. And then they’ll give me back
my two notes. They’re in it together, it’s clear.”
“An obvious absurdity! If they denounce you, they’ll betray themselves!
They won’t denounce you for anything.”
“I realize that. They’re not threatening me with denunciation at all; they
merely say: ‘We won’t denounce you, of course, but if the affair happens to
be discovered, then . . .’—that’s what they say, and that’s all; but I think it’s
enough! That’s not the thing: whatever may come of it, and even if those
notes were in my pocket now, but to be solidary with those swindlers, to be
comrades with them eternally, eternally! To lie to Russia, to lie to my
children, to lie to Liza, to lie to my own conscience! . . .”
“Does Liza know?”
“No, she doesn’t know everything. She couldn’t bear it in her condition. I
now wear the uniform of my regiment, and every time I meet a soldier of
my regiment, every second, I’m conscious in myself that I dare not wear
this uniform.”
“Listen,” I cried suddenly, “there’s nothing to talk about here; you have
only one way of salvation: go to Prince Nikolai Ivanovich, borrow ten

thousand from him, ask without revealing anything, then summon those two
swindlers, settle with them finally, and buy your notes back . . . and that
will be the end of it! That will be the end of it all, and—off to the plowing!
Away with fantasies and trust yourself to life!”
“I’ve thought about that,” he said firmly. “I spent the whole day today
deciding, and finally decided. I’ve only been waiting for you. I’ll go. Do
you know that I’ve never borrowed a kopeck from Prince Nikolai Ivanovich
in my life? He’s kind towards our family and has even . . . contributed, but I
myself, I personally, have never taken money from him. But now I’ve
decided . . . Note that our branch of the Sokolskys is older than Prince
Nikolai Ivanovich’s branch: they’re a younger branch, even a collateral one,
even a questionable one . . . Our ancestors were enemies. At the beginning
of Peter’s reforms, my great-grandfather, also Peter, was and remained a
schismatic25 and wandered in the forests of Kostroma. That Prince Peter
was also married a second time to a non-noble girl . . . It was then that these
other Sokolskys advanced themselves, but I . . . what am I talking about?”
He was very tired and talking as if at random.
“Calm yourself,” I stood up, taking my hat, “go to bed, that’s the first
thing. And Prince Nikolai Ivanovich won’t refuse you for anything,
especially now, in his joy. Do you know the story there? You really don’t?
I’ve heard a wild thing, that he’s getting married; it’s a secret, but not from
you, naturally.”
And I told him everything, already standing hat in hand. He knew
nothing. He quickly inquired about the details, primarily the time, the place,
and the degree of reliability. Of course, I didn’t conceal from him that,
according to the story, this had happened immediately after his visit
yesterday to Anna Andreevna. I can’t express what a painful impression this
news made on him; his face became distorted, as if twisted, and a crooked
smile convulsively contracted his lips; in the end he turned terribly pale and
lapsed into deep thought, his eyes lowered. I suddenly saw all too clearly
that his self-love had been terribly stricken by Anna Andreevna’s refusal
yesterday. Maybe, in his morbid mood, he pictured all too vividly at that

moment his ridiculous and humiliating role yesterday before this girl, of
whose acceptance, it now turned out, he had been so calmly assured all
along. And, finally, maybe the thought that he had done such a mean thing
to Liza, and for nothing! It’s curious how these society fops regard each
other, and on what basis they can respect each other; this prince might have
supposed that Anna Andreevna already knew of his liaison with Liza—with
her sister, in fact—and if she didn’t, she was sure to find out one day; and
yet he “had no doubt of her decision”!
“Could you really think,” he suddenly raised his eyes to me proudly and
haughtily, “that I, I am capable of going now, after your communication,
and asking Prince Nikolai Ivanovich for money? Asking him who is the
fiancé of the girl who has just refused me—how beggarly, how servile! No,
now all is lost, and if the help of this old man was my last hope, then let that
last hope, too, be lost!”
I agreed with him in my heart; but still, one must take a broader view of
reality: was the little old prince a man, a fiancé? Several ideas began
seething in my head at once. Even without that, however, I had decided
earlier that tomorrow I would visit the old man without fail. But now I tried
to soften the impression and put the poor prince to bed: “You’ll have a good
sleep, and your ideas will brighten up, you’ll see for yourself !” He shook
my hand warmly, but didn’t kiss me. I gave him my word that I’d come the
next evening and “we’ll talk, we’ll talk: all too much has accumulated for
us to talk about.” At these words of mine he smiled somehow fatally.

Chapter Eight
I
ALL THAT NIGHT I dreamed of roulette, gambling, gold, calculations. I
kept calculating something, as if I was at the gaming table, some stake,
some chance, and it oppressed me all night like a nightmare. To tell the
truth, that whole previous day, despite all my extraordinary impressions, I
kept recalling my win at Zershchikov’s. I suppressed the thought, but could
not suppress the impression and trembled at the mere recollection. That win
had stung my heart. Could it be I was a born gambler? At least it was
certain that I had the qualities of a gambler. Even now, as I’m writing all
this, I like at moments to think about gambling! It sometimes happens that I
spend whole hours sitting silently, making gambling calculations in my
mind and dreaming of how it will all go, how I’ll stake and win. Yes, there
are many different “qualities” in me, and my soul is restless.
At ten o’clock I intended to set off for Stebelkov’s, and that on foot. I
sent Matvei home as soon as he appeared. While having my coffee, I tried
to collect my thoughts. For some reason I was pleased; instantly looking
into myself, I realized that I was mainly pleased with the fact that “today I
would be in the home of Prince Nikolai Ivanovich.” But this day of my life
was fateful and unexpected and began at once with a surprise.
At exactly ten o’clock my door was flung open and in flew—Tatyana
Pavlovna. I might have expected anything but that woman’s appearance,
and I jumped up before her in fright. Her face was ferocious, her gestures
disordered, and, if asked, she might not have been able to say herself why
she had rushed in on me. I’ll say beforehand: she had just received an
extraordinary piece of news which had crushed her, and was under the very
first impression of it. And the news touched me as well. However, she spent
just half a minute with me, or say a whole minute, but not more. She just
fastened on to me.

“So that’s how you are!” she stood in front of me, all thrust forward. “Ah,
you puppy! What have you done? Or don’t you know yet? He’s having his
coffee! Ah, you babbler, ah, you windmill, ah, you paper lover . . . the likes
of you ought to be birched, birched, birched!”
“Tatyana Pavlovna, what’s happened? What’s wrong? Mama? . . .”
“You’ll find out!” she cried menacingly and rushed from the room—that
was all I saw of her. Of course, I would have chased after her, but I was
stopped by a thought, or not a thought, but some dark anxiety: I had a
presentiment that “paper lover” was the chief phrase in her shouting. Of
course, I would have guessed nothing on my own, but I quickly left, in
order to finish the sooner with Stebelkov and go to Prince Nikolai
Ivanovich’s. “The key to everything is there!” I thought instinctively.
It was astonishing how, but Stebelkov already knew everything about
Anna Andreevna, and even in detail; I won’t describe his conversation and
gestures, but he was in rapture, in an ecstasy of rapture, from the “artistry of
the deed.”
“There’s a person, sir! No, sir, there’s quite a person!” he exclaimed.
“No, sir, that’s not our way; we just sit here and nothing more, but she
wanted to drink water from a true source—and she did. It’s . . . it’s an
ancient statue! It’s an ancient statue of Minerva, sir, only she walks around
and wears modern dress!”
I asked him to get down to business. The whole business, as I fully
anticipated, consisted merely in inducing and persuading the prince to go
and ask for ultimate aid from Prince Nikolai Ivanovich. “Otherwise it may
be very, very bad for him, and not by my will; is that so or not?”
He peeked into my eyes, but didn’t seem to suppose that I knew anything
more than I had the day before. And he couldn’t have supposed anything:
needless to say, I didn’t betray by a word or a hint that I knew “about the
shares.” We didn’t talk long, he at once began promising me money, “and a
considerable amount, sir, a considerable amount, only help to make the

prince go. It’s an urgent matter, very urgent, there’s the force of it, that it’s
all too urgent!”
I didn’t want to argue and wrangle with him like the day before, and I got
up to go, letting drop to him in any case that I’d “try.” But he suddenly
astonished me inexpressibly: I was already going to the door when, putting
his arm affectionately around my waist, he unexpectedly began telling me .
. . the most incomprehensible things.
I’ll omit the details and not recount the whole thread of the conversation,
so as not to be tiresome. The gist of it was that he made me a proposition
“to acquaint him with Mr. Dergachev, since you do go there”!
I instantly became quiet, trying as hard as I could not to betray myself by
some gesture. I replied at once, however, that I was a complete stranger
there, and if I had been there, it was only once by chance.
“But if you were admitted once, then you can go another time, is that so
or not?”
I asked him directly, but very coolly, what he needed it for. And to this
day I cannot understand how such a degree of naïveté was possible in a
seemingly “practical” and not stupid man, as Vasin defined him. He
explained to me quite directly that at Dergachev’s, as he suspected, “most
likely something forbidden, strictly forbidden, is going on, and so, having
investigated, I might make myself a little profit from it.” And, smiling, he
winked at me with his left eye.
I answered precisely nothing in the affirmative, but pretended I was
thinking it over and “promised to think,” after which I quickly left. Things
were getting complicated: I flew to Vasin’s and just caught him at home.
“Ah, and you, too!” he said mysteriously on seeing me.
Not picking up his phrase, I went straight to the point and told him. He
was visibly struck, though he didn’t lose his equanimity. He asked me to
repeat it all in detail.

“Might it not well be that you misunderstood?”
“No, I understood correctly, the meaning was perfectly straightforward.”
“In any case I’m extremely grateful to you,” he added sincerely. “Yes,
indeed, if that’s how it all was, then he supposed you wouldn’t be able to
hold out against a certain sum.”
“And besides, he knew my situation all too well: I’ve been gambling,
I’ve behaved badly, Vasin.”
“I heard about that.”
“The most puzzling thing of all for me is that he knows about you, that
you go there, too,” I risked asking.
“He knows only too well,” Vasin replied quite simply, “that I have
nothing to do with them. And all these young people are mostly babblers—
and nothing more. You, however, may remember that better than anyone.”
It seemed to me as if he was not trusting me with something.
“In any case I’m extremely grateful to you.”
“I’ve heard that Mr. Stebelkov’s affairs are somewhat in disorder,” I
made another attempt to ask. “At least I’ve heard about some shares . . .”
“What shares have you heard about?”
I deliberately mentioned the “shares,” but, naturally, not in order to tell
him the prince’s secret from yesterday. I only wanted to drop a hint and see
by his face, by his eyes, whether he knew anything about the shares. I
achieved my goal: by an imperceptible and instant movement in his face, I
guessed that he might know something here as well. I didn’t reply to his
question, “What shares?” but remained silent; and he, curiously, didn’t
pursue it.
“How is Lizaveta Makarovna’s health?” he inquired with concern.

“She’s well. My sister has always respected you . . .”
Pleasure flashed in his eyes: I had guessed long ago that he was not
indifferent to Liza.
“Prince Sergei Petrovich came to see me the other day,” he suddenly
imparted.
“When?” I cried.
“Exactly four days ago.”
“Not yesterday?”
“No, not yesterday.” He looked at me questioningly.
“Later maybe I’ll tell you about this meeting in more detail, but now I
find it necessary to warn you,” Vasin said enigmatically, “that he appeared
to me then to be in an abnormal state of spirit and . . . even of mind.
However, I’ve had yet another visit,” he suddenly smiled, “just before you,
and I was also forced to conclude that the visitor was not quite in a normal
state.”
“The prince was just here?”
“No, not the prince, I’m not talking about the prince now. Andrei
Petrovich Versilov was just here and . . . do you know anything? Has
anything happened to him?”
“Maybe so, but what precisely went on between you and him?” I asked
hastily.
“Of course, I ought to keep this a secret . . . We’re having a strange
conversation, you and I, all too secretive,” he smiled again. “However,
Andrei Petrovich didn’t order me to keep it a secret. But you’re his son, and
since I know your feelings for him, this time it even seems I’ll do well to
warn you. Imagine, he came to me with a question: ‘If it so happens, one of

these days, very soon, that he needs to fight a duel, would I agree to play
the role of his second?’ Naturally, I roundly refused him.”
I was infinitely amazed; this news was the most alarming of all:
something had come out, something had gone on, something had certainly
happened that I still didn’t know about! I suddenly had a fleeting
recollection of Versilov saying to me yesterday, “I won’t come to you, but
you’ll come running to me.” I flew to Prince Nikolai Ivanovich’s, with a
still greater presentiment that the answer was there. Vasin, saying good-bye,
thanked me once more.

II
THE OLD PRINCE was sitting in front of the fireplace, his legs wrapped in
a plaid. He met me even with some sort of questioning look, as if surprised
that I had come, and yet he himself sent to invite me almost every day.
However, he greeted me affectionately, though he answered my first
questions as if somewhat squeamishly and somehow terribly distractedly.
Every now and then it was as if he realized something and peered at me
intently, as if he had forgotten something and was trying to recall this
something that undoubtedly had to be related to me. I told him directly that
I had heard everything and was very glad. A cordial and kindly smile
immediately appeared on his lips, and he became animated; his wariness
and mistrust dropped away at once, as if he had forgotten them. And, of
course, he had.
“My dear friend, I just knew you’d be the first to come and, you know,
only yesterday I had this thought about you: ‘Who will be glad? He will.’
Well, and really nobody else; but never mind that. People have wicked
tongues, but that’s insignificant . . . Cher enfant, this is all so sublime and so
lovely . . . But you know her only too well yourself. And Anna Andreevna
even has the highest notions of you. It’s . . . it’s a stern and lovely face, a
face out of an English keepsake.26 The loveliest English engraving that
could ever be . . . Two years ago I had a whole collection of these
engravings . . . I always, always had this intention, always; I’m only
surprised that I never thought of it.”

“As far as I remember, you always loved and distinguished Anna
Andreevna so.”
“My friend, we don’t want to harm anybody. Life with our friends, with
our family, with those dear to our hearts—this is paradise. Everyone is a
poet . . . In short, it’s all been known from prehistoric times. You know, in
the summer we’ll go first to Soden and then to Bad-Gastein.27 But you
haven’t come for so long, my friend; what’s the matter with you? I’ve been
expecting you. And isn’t it true, so much, so much has gone on since then.
It’s only a pity I get restless; as soon as I’m left alone, I get restless. That’s
why I shouldn’t be left alone, isn’t it true? It’s two times two. I understood
it at once from her first words. Oh, my friend, she said only two words, but
it . . . it was like a magnificent poem. But anyhow, you’re her brother,
almost a brother, isn’t it true? My dear, it’s not for nothing that I loved you
so! I swear, I anticipated it all. I kissed her little hand and wept.”
He pulled out his handkerchief as if he was going to weep again. He was
badly shaken and seemed to be in one of the worst “states” I could
remember him being in during all the time of our acquaintance. Ordinarily,
and even almost always, he was incomparably more fresh and hearty.
“I would forgive everyone, my friend,” he prattled on. “I want to forgive
everyone, and I haven’t been angry with anyone for a long time. Art, la
poésie dans la vie,46 helping the poor, and she, a biblical beauty. Quelle
charmante personne, eh? Les chants de Salomon . . . non, ce n’est pas
Salomon, c’est David qui mettait une jeune fille dans son lit pour se chau
fer dans sa vieillesse. Enfin David, Salomon,4728 it’s all going around in my
head—some sort of jumble. Each and every thing, cher enfant, can be both
majestic and at the same time ridiculous. Cette jeune belle de la vieillesse
de David—c’est tout un poème,48 but Paul de Kock29 would make some
scène de bassinoire 49; out of it, and we’d all laugh. Paul de Kock has
neither measure nor taste, though he is talented . . . Katerina Nikolaevna
smiles . . . I told her we wouldn’t bother anybody. We’ve begun our
romance, and they should let us finish it. Let it be a dream, but let them not
take this dream away from us.”

“How is it a dream, Prince?”
“A dream? How a dream? Well, let it be a dream, only let them allow us
to die with this dream.”
“Oh, Prince, what’s this about dying? Live, only live now!”
“But what am I saying? That’s all I keep repeating. I decidedly don’t
know why life is so short. So as not to be boring, of course, for life is also a
work of art by the Creator himself, in the finished and impeccable form of a
Pushkin poem. Brevity is the first condition of artistry. But if there are some
who aren’t bored, they should be allowed to live longer.”
“Tell me, Prince, is it already public?”
“No, my dear, by no means! We all agreed on that. It’s a family matter, a
family matter, a family matter. For now I’ve only revealed it fully to
Katerina Nikolaevna, because I consider myself guilty before her. Oh,
Katerina Nikolaevna is an angel, she’s an angel!”
“Yes, yes!”
“Yes? You, too, say ‘yes’? And I precisely thought you were her enemy.
Ah, yes, incidentally, she asked me not to receive you anymore. And
imagine, when you came in, I suddenly forgot it.”
“What are you saying?” I jumped up. “What for? When?”
(My presentiment had not deceived me; yes, I had had precisely that
presentiment ever since Tatyana!)
“Yesterday, my dear, yesterday. I don’t even understand how you came
in, for measures were taken. How did you come in?”
“I simply came in.”
“Most likely. If you had come in cunningly, they would certainly have
caught you, but since you simply came in, they let you in. Simplicity, mon

cher, is in fact the highest form of cunning.”
“I don’t understand anything. So you, too, have decided not to receive
me?”
“No, my friend, I said I’d keep out of it . . . That is, I gave my full
consent. And you may be sure, my dear boy, that I love you very much. But
Katerina Nikolaevna demanded it all very, very insistently . . . Ah, there!”
At that moment Katerina Nikolaevna suddenly appeared in the doorway.
She was dressed to go out, and, as she used to do before, had come to kiss
her father. Seeing me, she stopped, became embarrassed, turned quickly,
and left.
“Voilà! ” cried the prince, struck and terribly alarmed.
“It’s a misunderstanding!” I cried. “It’s some sort of momentary . . . I . . .
I’ll be right back, Prince!”
And I ran after Katerina Nikolaevna.
Everything that followed after that happened so quickly that I was not
only unable to collect my thoughts, but couldn’t even prepare in the least
how to behave. If I could have prepared myself, I would, of course, have
behaved differently. But I was at a loss, like a little boy. I was rushing to her
rooms, but a footman on the way told me that Katerina Nikolaevna had
already gone out and was getting into the carriage. I rushed headlong to the
front stairway. Katerina Nikolaevna was going down the stairs in her fur
coat, and beside her, or, better to say, leading her, was a tall, trim officer in
uniform, without a greatcoat, wearing a saber; a footman behind him was
carrying his greatcoat. This was the baron, a colonel, about thirty-five, the
foppish type of officer, lean, with a slightly too-elongated face, with a
reddish moustache and even eyelashes. His face, though not at all
handsome, had a sharp and defiant physiognomy. I’m describing him
hastily, as I noticed him at that moment. I had never seen him before. I ran
down the stairs after them, without hat or coat. Katerina Nikolaevna noticed
me first and quickly whispered something to him. He made as if to turn his

head, but nodded at once to the servant and the porter. The servant was
stepping towards me just at the front door, but I moved him aside with my
arm and jumped out after them onto the porch. Bjoring was helping
Katerina Nikolaevna into the carriage.
“Katerina Nikolaevna! Katerina Nikolaevna!” I exclaimed senselessly
(like a fool! Like a fool! Oh, I remember it all, I had no hat on!).
Bjoring again turned fiercely to the servant and loudly shouted something
to him, one or two words, I didn’t make it out. I felt someone seize me by
the elbow. At that moment the carriage started; I cried out again and rushed
after the carriage. Katerina Nikolaevna, I saw this, peeked out the window
of the carriage and seemed to be greatly troubled. But in my quick
movement as I rushed, I suddenly gave Bjoring a strong shove, not thinking
of it at all, and, it seems, stepped very painfully on his foot. He cried out
slightly, gnashed his teeth, and with his strong hand seized me by the
shoulder and spitefully shoved me away, so that I went flying two or three
paces. At that moment they handed him his greatcoat, he threw it on, got
into a sledge, and shouted menacingly once more, pointing me out to the
lackeys and the porter. Here they seized me and held me back. One servant
threw my coat over my shoulders, the other handed me my hat, and—I
don’t remember what they said then; they were saying something, and I
stood and listened to them without understanding anything. But suddenly I
abandoned them and ran off.

III
SEEING NOTHING AND bumping into people as I ran, I finally reached
Tatyana Pavlovna’s apartment, not even thinking of hiring a cab on the way.
Bjoring had shoved me aside in her presence! Of course, I had stepped on
his foot, and he had shoved me aside instinctively, like a man whose corn
has been stepped on (and maybe I had indeed squashed his corn!). But she
had seen it, and had seen the servants seize me, and it had all happened in
front of her, in front of her! When I came running into Tatyana Pavlovna’s
apartment, for the first minute I couldn’t say anything, and my lower jaw

trembled as in a fever. And I was in a fever and, on top of that, I was
weeping . . . Oh, I had been so insulted!
“Eh! What! Kicked out? Serves you right, serves you right!” said Tatyana
Pavlovna. I lowered myself silently onto the sofa and looked at her.
“But what’s the matter with him?” she looked me over intently. “Here,
drink this glass, drink some water, drink it! Speak, what other mischief have
you been up to?”
I murmured that I had been thrown out, and Bjoring had pushed me in the
street.
“Are you able to understand anything yet, or not? Here, read and
admire.” And taking a note from the table, she handed it to me and stood in
front of me expectantly. I at once recognized Versilov’s hand, there were
just a few lines: it was a note to Katerina Nikolaevna. I gave a start, and
understanding immediately came back to me in full force. Here are the
contents of this terrible, outrageous, preposterous, and villainous note, word
for word:
Dear Madam, Katerina Nikolaevna,
However depraved you are, by your nature and by your art, still I always
thought that you would restrain your passion and at least not make attempts
on children. But even of that you were not ashamed. I inform you that the
document known to you has certainly not been burned in a candle and was
never with Kraft, so you will not gain anything here. And therefore do not
corrupt the youth for nothing. Spare him, he is still under age, almost a boy,
undeveloped mentally and physically, what use is he to you? I have
sympathy for him, and therefore I have risked writing to you, though I have
no hope of success. I have the honor of forewarning you that I am
simultaneously sending a copy of this present to Baron Bjoring. A. Versilov.
I turned pale as I read, but then suddenly flushed, and my lips trembled
with indignation.

“He means me! It’s about what I revealed to him two days ago!” I cried
in fury.
“That’s just it—revealed!” Tatyana Pavlovna tore the note from my
hands.
“But . . . that’s not, that’s not at all what I said! Oh, my God, what can
she think of me now! But isn’t this mad? Yes, he’s mad . . . I saw him
yesterday. When was the letter sent?”
“It was sent yesterday afternoon, it came in the evening, and today she
gave it to me personally.”
“But I saw him yesterday myself. He’s mad! Versilov couldn’t have
written like that, it was written by a madman! Who can write like that to a
woman?”
“Such madmen write like that in a fury, when they go blind and deaf
from jealousy and spite, and their blood turns to poisonous arsenic . . . But
you still didn’t know about him, what kind he is! They’ll swat him for that
now, there’ll be nothing left but a wet spot. He’s put himself under the axe!
Better go to the Nikolaevsky railroad at night, lay his head on the rails, and
get it lopped off, since he finds it so heavy to carry around! What drove you
to tell him? What drove you to tease him? Did you want to boast?”
“But what hatred! What hatred!” I slapped myself on the head with my
hand. “And what for, what for? Towards a woman! What has she done to
him? What kind of relations did they have, that he can write such letters?”
“Ha-a-atred!” Tatyana Pavlovna imitated me with furious mockery.
The blood rose to my face again; it was as if I suddenly realized
something quite new; I looked at her questioningly as hard as I could.
“Get out of here!” she shrieked, quickly turning away and waving her
hand at me. “I’ve bothered enough with all of you! That will do now! You

can all fall through the earth! . . . It’s only your mother I’m still sorry for . .
.”
Naturally, I went running to Versilov. But such perfidy! Such perfidy!

IV
VERSILOV WAS NOT ALONE. I’ll explain beforehand: having sent such
a letter to Katerina Nikolaevna the day before, and having actually (God
only knows why) sent a copy of it to Baron Bjoring, he naturally had to
expect that day, in the course of the day, certain “consequences” of his act,
and therefore had taken measures of a sort. In the morning he had
transferred mama and Liza (who, as I learned later, on coming back in the
morning, had felt unwell and was lying in bed) upstairs to the “coffin,” and
the rooms, especially our “drawing room,” had been thoroughly tidied up
and cleaned. And indeed, at two o’clock in the afternoon, he had been
visited by a certain Baron R., an army colonel, a gentleman of about forty,
of German origin, tall, dry, with the look of a man of great physical
strength, also with reddish hair like Bjoring, and slightly bald. He was one
of those Barons R., of whom there are so many in the Russian army, all
people of strong baronial arrogance, utterly without fortune, who live on
their pay alone and are extremely soldierly and disciplinarian. I didn’t catch
the beginning of their talk; they were both very animated, and how could
they not be. Versilov was sitting on the sofa in front of the table, and the
baron in an armchair to the side. Versilov was pale, but spoke with restraint
and through his teeth, while the baron kept raising his voice and was
obviously inclined to impulsive gestures, restrained himself with effort, but
had a stern, haughty, and even scornful look, though not without a certain
surprise. Seeing me, he frowned, but Versilov was almost glad of me:
“Greetings, my dear. Baron, this is that same very young man who is
mentioned in the note, and believe me, he won’t hinder us, and may even be
needed.” (The baron looked me over scornfully.) “My dear,” Versilov added
to me, “I’m even glad you’ve come, so sit in the corner, I beg you, while the
baron and I finish here. Don’t worry, Baron, he’ll just sit in the corner.”

It was all the same to me, because I had made up my mind, and besides,
all this struck me; I sat silently in the corner, as far as possible in the corner,
and sat without batting an eye or stirring till the end of their talk . . .
“I repeat to you once more, Baron,” Versilov said, firmly rapping out the
words, “that I consider Katerina Nikolaevna Akhmakov, to whom I wrote
that unworthy and morbid letter, not only the noblest being, but also the
height of all perfections!”
“Such a refutation of your own words, as I’ve already observed to you,
looks like a new confirmation of them,” grunted the baron. “Your words are
decidedly disrespectful.”
“But, all the same, it would be most correct if you took them in their
precise sense. You see, I suffer from fits and . . . various disorders, and am
even being treated, and so it happened that in one such moment . . .”
“These explanations can in no way enter in. I have told you again and
again that you stubbornly go on being mistaken, and maybe you
deliberately want to be mistaken. I already warned you at the very
beginning that the whole question concerning this lady, that is, about your
letter to Mme. Akhmakov proper, must be definitively eliminated from our
present conversation; yet you keep returning to it. Baron Bjoring asked me
and charged me particularly to clarify, properly speaking, only that which
concerns him, that is, your brazen communicating of this ‘copy’ and then
your postscript, that ‘you are prepared to answer for it in whatever way he
pleases.’”
“But it seems the last part is already clear without explanations.”
“I understand, I’ve heard. You do not even apologize, but just go on
insisting that ‘you are prepared to answer in whatever way he pleases.’ But
that would be too cheap. And therefore I now find myself right, in view of
the turn you so stubbornly want to give our talk, to tell you everything from
my side without constraint; that is, I have come to the conclusion that Baron
Bjoring cannot possibly have any dealings with you . . . on an equal
footing.”

“Such a decision is, of course, one of the more advantageous for your
friend, Baron Bjoring, and, I confess, you haven’t surprised me in the least:
I was expecting that.”
I’ll note in parenthesis: it was all too evident to me from the first words,
the first look, that Versilov was even seeking an outburst, that he was
provoking and teasing this irritable baron, and maybe trying his patience
too much. The baron winced.
“I have heard that you can be witty, but wit is not yet intelligence.”
“An extremely profound observation, Colonel.”
“I did not ask for your praise,” cried the baron, “and I have not come to
pour through a sieve! Be so good as to listen: Baron Bjoring was in great
doubt on receiving your letter, because it testified to the madhouse. And, of
course, means could have been found at once to . . . calm you down. But,
owing to certain special considerations, you were granted indulgence, and
inquiries were made about you. It turned out that, though you belonged to
good society and had once served in the guards, you have been excluded
from society, and your reputation is more than dubious. However, even
despite that, I have come here to ascertain personally, and here, on top of
everything else, you allow yourself to play with words and yourself assert
that you are subject to fits. Enough! Baron Bjoring’s position and his
reputation cannot indulge you in this affair . . . In short, dear sir, I am
authorized to announce to you that if this is followed by a repetition or
merely by anything resembling the previous action, means will immediately
be found to pacify you, quite quick and reliable ones, I can assure you. We
do not live in the forest, but in a well-organized state!”
“Are you so sure of that, my good Baron R.?”
“Devil take it,” the baron suddenly stood up, “you tempt me too much to
prove to you right now that I am hardly your ‘good Baron R.’”
“Ah, once again I warn you,” Versilov also got up, “that my wife and
daughter are not far from here . . . and therefore I would beg you not to

speak so loudly, because your shouts may reach them.”
“Your wife . . . the devil . . . If I sat and talked with you now, it was
solely with the aim of clarifying this vile affair,” the baron went on with the
same wrath and not lowering his voice in the least. “Enough!” he cried out
furiously. “You are not only excluded from the circle of decent people, but
you are a maniac, a real crazy maniac, and so you have been attested! You
are not worthy of indulgence, and I announce to you that this very day
measures will be taken regarding you, and you will be invited to one such
place, where they will know how to restore your reason . . . and they will
remove you from town!”
With big and rapid strides he left the room. Versilov didn’t see him off.
He stood, gazed at me distractedly, and seemed not to notice me; suddenly
he smiled, shook his hair, and, taking his hat, also started towards the door.
I seized him by the arm.
“Ah, yes, you’re here, too? You . . . heard?” he stopped in front of me.
“How could you have done it? How could you so distort, so disgrace! . . .
With such perfidy!”
He gazed intently, but his smile extended more and more and decidedly
turned to laughter.
“But I’ve been disgraced . . . in front of her! In front of her! I was derided
in her eyes, and he . . . shoved me!” I cried, beside myself.
“Really? Ah, poor boy, I’m so sorry for you . . . So they . . . de-ri-ded you
there!”
“You’re laughing, you’re laughing at me! You think it’s funny!”
He quickly tore his arm from my hand, put his hat on, and laughing,
laughing with genuine laughter now, left the apartment. Why should I go
after him? What for? I had understood everything and—lost everything in a

single moment! Suddenly I saw mama; she had come down from upstairs
and was timidly looking around.
“He’s gone?”
I silently embraced her, and she me, tightly, tightly, pressing herself
against me.
“Mama, my own, can you possibly stay here? Let’s go now, I’ll protect
you, I’ll work for you like at hard labor, for you and for Liza . . . Let’s leave
them all, all, and go away. We’ll be by ourselves. Mama, do you remember
how you came to see me at Touchard’s and how I refused to recognize
you?”
“I remember, my own, all my life I’ve been guilty before you, I gave
birth to you, but I didn’t know you.”
“He’s the guilty one, mama, it’s he who is guilty of everything; he never
loved us.”
“No, he did love us.”
“Let’s go, mama.”
“How can I go away from him, is he happy, do you think?”
“Where’s Liza?”
“Lying down. She came back and felt unwell; I fear for her. What, are
they very angry with him there? What will they do with him now? Where
did he go? What was this officer threatening here?”
“Nothing will happen to him, mama, nothing will ever happen to him,
and nothing can, he’s that kind of man! Here’s Tatyana Pavlovna, ask her, if
you don’t believe me, here she is.” (Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly came into
the room.) “Good-bye, mama. I’ll come back to you right away, and when I
do, I’ll ask you the same thing again . . .”

I ran off; I couldn’t see anybody at all, not only Tatyana Pavlovna, and
mama tormented me. I wanted to be alone, alone.

V
BUT BEFORE I reached the end of the street, I felt that I couldn’t walk
around senselessly bumping into these alien, indifferent people; but what to
do with myself? Who needs me and—what do I need now? Mechanically, I
trudged to Prince Sergei Petrovich’s, without thinking of him at all. He
wasn’t home. I told Pyotr (his man) that I’d wait in the study (as I had done
many times). His study was a big, very high room, cluttered with furniture.
I wandered into the darkest corner, sat down on the sofa, and, placing my
elbows on the table, propped my head in both hands. Yes, that was the
question: “What do I need now?” And if I could have formulated the
question then, the last thing I could have done was answer it.
But I was no longer able either to think or to ask properly. I’ve already
made known above that by the end of those days I was “crushed by events”;
I sat there now and everything was spinning like chaos in my mind. “Yes, I
failed to see everything in him and perceived nothing,” I fancied at
moments. “He laughed in my face just now: it wasn’t at me; it’s all Bjoring
here, and not me. Two days ago, over dinner, he already knew everything
and was gloomy. He picked up my stupid confession in the tavern and
distorted all that concerned any truth, only what did he need the truth for?
He doesn’t believe half a word of what he wrote to her. He only needed to
insult her, to insult her senselessly, not even knowing what for, snatching at
a pretext, and I gave him a pretext . . . The act of a rabid dog! Does he want
to kill Bjoring now, or what? Why? His heart knows why! And I know
nothing of what’s in his heart . . . No, no, even now I don’t know. Can he
love her with so much passion? Or hate her with so much passion? I don’t
know, but does he know himself? What was that I said to mama, that
‘nothing can happen to him’? What did I mean to say by that? Have I lost
him or not?
“. . . She saw how he shoved me . . . Did she also laugh or not? I’d have
laughed! The spy’s been beaten, the spy! . . .

“What does it mean” (it suddenly flashed in me), “what does it mean, his
including in that nasty letter that the document hasn’t been burned at all, but
still exists? . . .
“He won’t kill Bjoring, but he’s certainly sitting in the tavern now,
listening to Lucia! And maybe after Lucia he’ll go and kill Bjoring. Bjoring
shoved me, almost hit me; did he hit me? Bjoring scorns to fight even with
Versilov, how can he go fighting with me? Maybe I should kill him
tomorrow with a revolver, waiting in the street . . .” And I let this thought
pass through my head quite mechanically, without lingering over it in the
least.
At moments it was as if I dreamed that the door would open now,
Katerina Nikolaevna would come in, give me her hand, and we’d both
laugh . . . Oh, my dear student! I imagined it, that is, wished for it, when it
was already very dark in the room. “But was it so long ago that I stood
before her, saying good-bye to her, and she gave me her hand and laughed?
How could it happen that in such a short time such a terrible distance
appeared! Simply go to her and talk it over right now, this minute, simply,
simply! Lord, how is it that a totally new world has begun so suddenly! Yes,
a new world, totally, totally new . . . And Liza, and the prince, that’s still the
old . . . Here I am now at the prince’s. And mama—how could she live with
him, if it’s so? I could, I can do anything, but she? What will happen now?”
And here, as in a whirl, the figures of Liza, Anna Andreevna, Stebelkov, the
prince, Aferdov, everybody flashed tracelessly in my sick brain. But my
thoughts were growing more formless and elusive; I was glad when I
managed to comprehend one of them and get hold of it.
“I have my ‘idea’!” I thought suddenly. “But is that so? Don’t I just
repeat it by rote? My idea is darkness and solitude, but is it possible now to
crawl back into the former darkness? Ah, my God, I haven’t burned the
‘document’! I simply forgot to burn it two days ago. I’ll go back and burn it
in a candle, precisely in a candle; I don’t know whether what I think now . .
.”

It had long been dark, and Pyotr brought in candles. He stood over me
and asked whether I had eaten. I only waved my hand. However, an hour
later he brought me tea, and I greedily drank a big cup. Then I inquired
what time it was. It was half-past eight, and I wasn’t even surprised that I
had been sitting there for five hours already.
“I’ve come to you three times now,” said Pyotr, “but it seemed you were
asleep.”
I didn’t remember him coming in. I don’t know why, but I suddenly felt
terribly frightened at having “slept,” got up and began pacing the room so
as not to “fall asleep” again. Finally, my head began to ache badly. At
exactly ten o’clock the prince came in, and I was surprised that I had waited
for him; I had totally forgotten about him, totally.
“You’re here, and I went to your place looking for you,” he said to me.
His face was dark and stern, without the slightest smile. There was a fixed
idea in his eyes.
“I’ve struggled all day and used all measures,” he went on focusedly.
“Everything kept collapsing, and there’s horror to come . . .” (N.B. He
never went to Prince Nikolai Ivanovich.) “I saw Zhibelsky, he’s an
impossible man. You see: first I must have the money, and then we’ll see.
And if, with the money, it still doesn’t work out, then . . . But today I
decided not to think about it. Let’s just get the money today, and tomorrow
we’ll see about it all. Your winnings from three days ago are still intact to
the kopeck. It’s three thousand minus three roubles. Subtracting your debt,
you’re left with three hundred and forty in change. Take that and another
seven hundred to make a thousand, and I’ll take the remaining two
thousand. Then we’ll sit down at Zershchikov’s at two different ends and
try to win ten thousand—maybe we’ll do something, and if we don’t win,
then . . . Anyhow, that’s the only way left.”
He gave me a fateful look.
“Yes, yes!” I cried suddenly, as if resurrecting. “Let’s go! I’ve only been
waiting for you . . .”

I’ll note that I hadn’t thought about roulette for a moment in all those
hours.
“But the baseness? But the meanness of the act?” the prince asked
suddenly.
“That we’re going to play roulette? No, that’s everything!” I cried.
“Money is everything! It’s only we who are saints, and Bjoring has sold
himself. Anna Andreevna has sold herself, and Versilov—have you heard
that Versilov’s a maniac? A maniac! A maniac!”
“Are you well, Arkady Makarovich? Your eyes are somehow strange.”
“Are you saying that in order to go without me? But I won’t leave you
now. Not for nothing was I dreaming about gambling all night. Let’s go,
let’s go!” I kept crying, as if I had suddenly found the solution to
everything.
“Let’s go, then, though you’re in a fever, but there . . .”
He didn’t finish. His face looked heavy, terrible. We were already going
out.
“Do you know,” he said suddenly, pausing in the doorway, “there’s yet
another way out of my trouble besides gambling?”
“Which?”
“The princely way!”
“But what? But what?”
“Later you’ll find out what. Only know that I’m no longer worthy of it,
because it’s too late. Let’s go, and remember my words. Let’s try the
lackey’s way out . . . As if I don’t know that I am consciously, of my own
full will, going and acting like a lackey!”

VI
I FLEW TO the roulette table as if my whole salvation, my whole way out,
was focused in it, and yet, as I’ve already said, before the prince came, I
hadn’t even thought of it. And I was going to play, not for myself, but for
the prince, on the prince’s money; I can’t conceive what drew me on, but it
drew me irresistibly. Oh, never had these people, these faces, these
croupiers, these gambling cries, this whole squalid hall at Zershchikov’s,
never had it all seemed so loathsome to me, so dismal, so coarse and sad, as
this time! I remember only too well the grief and sadness that seized my
heart at times during all those hours at the table. But what made me not
leave? What made me endure, as if I had taken a fate, a sacrifice, a heroic
deed upon myself? I’ll say one thing: I can scarcely say of myself that I was
in my right mind then. And yet I had never played so intelligently as that
evening. I was silent and concentrated, attentive and terribly calculating; I
was patient and stingy and at the same time decided in decisive moments. I
placed myself again by the zéro, that is, again between Zershchikov and
Aferdov, who always sat next to Zershchikov on the right; I detested that
place, but I wanted absolutely to stake on zéro, and all the other places by
the zéro were taken. We had been playing for over an hour; finally, from my
place, I saw the prince suddenly get up, pale, and walk over to us, and stand
facing me across the table. He had lost everything and silently watched my
game, though he probably understood nothing in it and was no longer
thinking about the game. By that time I was just beginning to win, and
Zershchikov counted out money to me. All at once Aferdov, silently, before
my eyes, in the most brazen way, took one of my hundred-rouble notes and
added it to his pile of money lying in front of him. I cried out and seized
him by the hand. Here something unexpected happened to me: it was as if I
snapped my chain, as if all the horrors and injuries of that day were
suddenly focused on this one instant, on this disappearance of a hundredrouble note. As if all that was stored up and suppressed in me had only been
waiting for this moment to break out.
“He’s a thief! He just stole a hundred-rouble note from me!” I exclaimed,
looking around, beside myself.

I won’t describe the tumult that arose; such an incident was a complete
novelty here. People behaved decently at Zershchikov’s, and the place was
known for that. But I forgot myself. Amidst the noise and shouting,
Zershchikov’s voice was suddenly heard:
“And by the way, there’s money missing, and it was lying right here!
Four hundred roubles!”
Another incident took place at once: money had disappeared from the
bank, under Zershchikov’s nose, a roll of four hundred roubles. Zershchikov
pointed to the spot where it was lying, “was lying just now,” and that spot
turned out to be right next to me, adjoining me, the place where my money
lay, meaning much closer to me than to Aferdov.
“Here’s the thief! It’s him stealing again, search him!” I exclaimed,
pointing at Aferdov.
“It’s all because unknown people are let in,” someone’s thundering and
impressive voice rang out amidst the general outcry. “They get in without
any recommendation! Who brought him? Who is he?”
“Some Dolgoruky.”
“Prince Dolgoruky?”
“Prince Sokolsky brought him,” somebody cried.
“Listen, Prince,” I screamed to him across the table in a frenzy, “they
consider me a thief, when it’s I who have just been robbed here! Tell them,
tell them about me!”
And here something took place that was the most terrible of all that had
happened that whole day . . . even in my whole life: the prince disavowed
me. I saw him shrug his shoulders and, in reply to the flood of questions,
utter sharply and clearly:
“I don’t answer for anyone. I beg you to leave me alone.”

Meanwhile Aferdov stood amidst the crowd and loudly demanded to be
searched. He turned out his pockets himself. His demand was answered
with shouts: “No, no, the thief is known!” Two summoned lackeys seized
me by the arms from behind.
“I will not let you search me, I will not allow it!” I shouted, struggling to
free myself.
But they dragged me to the next room, and there, amidst the crowd, they
searched me down to the last fold. I shouted and struggled.
“Dropped it, must be, have to look on the floor,” somebody decided.
“Go now and look on the floor!”
“Under the table, must be he managed to throw it there!”
“Of course, the trail’s cold . . .”
They led me out, but I somehow managed to stand in the doorway and
shout with senseless fury to the whole hall:
“Roulette is forbidden by law. Today I shall denounce you all!”
They took me downstairs, dressed me, and . . . opened the door to the
street before me.

Chapter Nine
I
THE DAY ENDED with catastrophe, but there remained the night, and this
is what I remembered from that night.
I think it was just past midnight when I found myself in the street. The
night was clear, still, and frosty. I almost ran, was hurrying terribly, but—
certainly not for home. “Why home? Can there be a home now? At home
you live, I’d wake up tomorrow to live—but is that possible now? Life is
over, it’s no longer possible to live now.” And so I plodded along the
streets, not knowing where I was going, and I doubt that I wanted to get
anywhere. I felt very hot and kept throwing open my heavy raccoon coat.
“Now no sort of action,” it seemed to me at that moment, “can have any
purpose.” And, strangely, I kept fancying that everything around me, even
the air I breathed, was as if from another planet, as though I suddenly found
myself on the moon. All of it—the city, the passersby, the sidewalk I was
running along—all of it was suddenly not mine anymore. “This is the
Palace Square, this is St. Isaac’s,” went through my head, “but now I have
nothing to do with them.” Everything somehow forsook me, suddenly
became not mine. “I have mama, Liza—well, what of it, what are Liza and
my mother to me now? Everything is over, everything is over all at once,
except one thing: that I am a thief forever.
“How can I prove that I’m not a thief? Is it possible now? Shall I go to
America? Well, what would I prove by that? Versilov will be the first to
believe that I stole! My ‘idea’? What ‘idea’? What of that now? In fifty
years, in a hundred years, I’ll be walking along, and a man will always turn
up who will point at me and say: ‘Look at that thief. He began his “idea” by
stealing money at roulette’. . .”

Was there anger in me? I don’t know, maybe there was. Strangely, there
had always been this feature in me, maybe ever since earliest childhood:
once evil had been done to me, fulfilled to the utmost, and I had been
offended to the final limits, there always appeared in me at once an
unquenchable desire to submit passively to the offense and even to outstrip
the offender’s desires: “There, you’ve humiliated me, so I’ll humiliate
myself still more, look here, admire!” Touchard used to beat me and wanted
to show that I was a lackey and not a senator’s son, and so I myself at once
entered into the role of lackey then. I not only helped him to dress, but
would seize the brush myself and begin brushing the last specks of dust off
him, without any request or order from him, sometimes ran after him, in the
heat of my lackey zeal, to brush off some last speck of dust from his
tailcoat, so that he himself sometimes stopped me: “Enough, enough,
Arkady, enough.” He used to come and take off his street clothes—and I
would clean them, fold them carefully, and cover them with a checked silk
handkerchief. I knew that my comrades laughed and despised me for that, I
knew it perfectly well, but that was what I liked: “You wanted me to be a
lackey, well, so I’m a lackey, a boor—yes, a boor.” I could keep up this
passive hatred and underground spite for years. And what then? At
Zershchikov’s I had shouted to the whole hall, in complete frenzy: “I shall
denounce you all, roulette is forbidden by law!” And I swear that here, too,
there was something as if similar: I had been humiliated, searched, declared
a thief, destroyed—“well, then know, all of you, that you’ve guessed right,
I’m not only a thief, I’m an informer as well!” Recalling it now, I sum it up
and explain it in precisely that way; but then I couldn’t be bothered with
analyzing; then I shouted without any intention; even a moment before, I
hadn’t known I’d shout that; it shouted itself—there was that streak in my
soul.
While I ran, the delirium was undoubtedly already starting, but I
remember very well that I was acting consciously. And yet I will say firmly
that there was a whole cycle of ideas and conclusions that was impossible
for me then; even in those minutes, I felt about myself that “certain
thoughts I can have, but others I can’t possibly have.” So, too, certain of my
decisions, though made with clear awareness, might not have the least logic
in them. Not only that: I remember very well that at some moments I could

be fully aware of the absurdity of some decision, and at the same time, with
full awareness, set about realizing it. Yes, a crime was hatching that night,
and it is only by chance that it wasn’t committed.
Tatyana Pavlovna’s phrase about Versilov suddenly flashed in me then:
“He should go to the Nikolaevsky railroad and lay his head on the rails:
he’d get it lopped off for him.” This thought momentarily took hold of all
my feelings, but I instantly and painfully drove it away: “I’ll lay my head
on the rails and die, and tomorrow they’ll say: he did it because he stole, he
did it out of shame—no, not for anything!” And then, at that moment, I
remember, I suddenly felt an instant of terrible anger. “What then?” raced
through my mind. “There’s no way I can vindicate myself, to start a new
life is also impossible, and so—submit, become a lackey, a dog, an insect,
an informer, a real informer now, but at the same time quietly make
preparations, and one day—blow it all sky high, destroy everything,
everybody—the guilty and the not-guilty, and then suddenly they’ll all find
out that it’s the same one they called a thief . . . and only then kill myself.”
I don’t remember how I ran into a lane somewhere near the
Konnogvardeisky Boulevard. In this lane there were high stone walls on
both sides, for almost a hundred paces—the enclosures of backyards.
Behind one wall to the left I saw an enormous woodpile, a long woodpile,
as in a lumberyard, and higher than the wall by some seven feet. I suddenly
stopped and began to ponder. In my pocket I had wax matches in a small
silver matchbox. I repeat, I was fully and distinctly aware then of what I
was pondering and what I wanted to do, as I am in recollecting it now, but
why I wanted to do it—I have no idea, none at all. I only remember that I
suddenly wanted it very much. “It’s very possible to climb onto the wall,” I
reasoned. Just two steps away there was a gate in the wall, which must have
been tightly shut for months. “If I step on the ledge below,” I reflected
further, “I can get hold of the top of the gate and climb onto the wall—and
nobody will notice, there’s nobody here, silence! And then I’ll sit on top of
the wall and set fire to the wood quite excellently, possibly even without
getting down, because the wood is almost touching the wall. It will burn
still better from the cold, all I have to do is take one birch log . . . and
there’s even no need to take a log: simply sit on the wall, peel some bark off

a birch log with my hand, and set fire to it with a match, set fire to it, and
shove it between the logs—and there’s your fire. And I’ll jump down and
leave; there’s even no need to run, because they won’t notice for a long time
. . .” So I reasoned it all out and—suddenly became quite decided. I felt
extreme pleasure, delight, and began to climb. I was an excellent climber:
gymnastics had been my specialty back in high school, but I was wearing
galoshes, and the thing proved difficult. Nevertheless I did manage to get
hold of a barely perceptible ledge above and pull myself up, while swinging
my other arm to grab at the top of the wall, but here I suddenly lost hold
and fell backwards. I suppose I hit the ground with the back of my head and
must have lain unconscious for a minute or two. Coming to, I mechanically
wrapped myself in my fur coat, suddenly feeling unbearably cold, and, still
not fully conscious of what I was doing, crawled into the corner of the
gateway and sat down there, huddling and crouching in the nook between
the gate and the projecting wall. My thoughts were confused, and I
probably dozed off very quickly. I now remember as if through sleep that a
deep, heavy bell suddenly rang in my ears, and I began listening to it with
delight.

II
THE BELL STRUCK firmly and distinctly once every two or even three
seconds, but it was not a tocsin, but some pleasant, smooth ringing, and I
suddenly realized that it was familiar, that it was ringing in the red church
of St. Nicholas opposite Touchard’s—the ancient Moscow church that I
remember so well, built in the time of Alexei Mikhailovich,30 fretty, manydomed, and “all in pillars,” and that Holy Week31 was just over, and the
newborn little green leaves were already trembling on the scrawny birches
in the front garden of Touchard’s house. The bright late-afternoon sun is
pouring its slanting rays into our classroom, and in my little room to the
left, where Touchard had put me a year before, away from the “princely and
senatorial children,” a visitor is sitting. Yes, I, the kinless one, suddenly
have a visitor—for the first time since I’ve been at Touchard’s. I recognized
this visitor as soon as she came in: it was mama, though I hadn’t seen her
even once since the time she brought me to communion in the village

church and the dove flew across the cupola. We were sitting together, and I
was watching her strangely. Afterwards, many years later, I learned that,
having been left then without Versilov, who had suddenly gone abroad, she
had come to Moscow on her own pitiful means, without leave, almost in
secret from those who were then charged with taking care of her, and had
done it solely in order to see me. Another strange thing was that, having
come in and spoken with Touchard, she had not even said a word to me
about being my mother. She sat by me and, I remember, I was even
surprised that she spoke so little. She had a small bundle with her, and she
untied it: there were six oranges in it, several gingerbreads, and two loaves
of ordinary French bread. I was offended by the French bread and, with a
wounded look, replied that our “food” here was very good and that we were
given a whole loaf of French bread with tea every day.
“Never mind, darling, I just thought in my simplicity, ‘Maybe they feed
them poorly in that school.’ Don’t hold it against me, dearest.”
“And Antonina Vassilievna” (Touchard’s wife) “will be offended. My
comrades will also laugh at me . . .”
“Don’t you want to take them, maybe you’ll eat them?”
“Leave them, if you like, ma’am . . .”
I didn’t even touch the treats; the oranges and gingerbreads lay in front of
me on the little table, and I sat looking down, but with a great air of
personal dignity. Who knows, maybe I also wanted very much not to
conceal from her that her visit even shamed me in the eyes of my comrades;
to show it to her at least a little, so that she’d understand: “You see, you
shame me and don’t even understand it yourself.” Oh, I was already running
after Touchard with a brush then, whisking specks of dust off him! I also
pictured how much mockery I’d have to endure from the boys as soon as
she left, and maybe from Touchard himself—and there was not the slightest
kind feeling for her in my heart. I only looked out of the corner of my eye at
her dark old dress, her rather coarse, almost working-woman’s hands, her
completely coarse shoes, and her very thin face; little wrinkles already ran

across her forehead, though Antonina Vassilievna told me later in the
evening, when she had left: “Your maman must have been very goodlooking once.”
We were sitting like that, and suddenly Agafya came in with a cup of
coffee on a tray. It was after dinner, and the Touchards always had coffee in
their living room at that time. But mama thanked her and did not take the
cup: as I learned later, she didn’t drink coffee at all then, because it gave her
heart palpitations. The thing was that to themselves the Touchards probably
considered her visit and the permission for her to see me an extraordinary
indulgence on their part, so that the cup of coffee they sent to mama was, so
to say, a deed of humaneness, comparatively speaking, which did
extraordinary credit to their civilized feelings and European notions. And,
as if on purpose, mama refused it.
I was summoned to Touchard, and he told me to take all my books and
notebooks to show mama: “So that she can see how much you’ve managed
to acquire in my institution.” Here Antonina Vassilievna, pursing her lips,
said to me for her part, touchily and mockingly, through her teeth:
“It seems your maman didn’t like our coffee.”
I gathered a pile of notebooks and carried them to my waiting mama, past
the “princely and senatorial children,” who were crowding in the classroom
and spying on mama and me. And I even liked fulfilling Touchard’s order
with literal precision. I methodically began to open my notebooks and
explain, “This is a lesson in French grammar, this is an exercise from
dictation, here is the conjugation of the auxiliary verbs avoir and être ,
here’s something from geography, a description of the major cities of
Europe and all parts of the world,” and so on, and so forth. For half an hour
or more I went on explaining in an even little voice, looking down like a
well-behaved boy. I knew that mama understood nothing in my studies,
maybe couldn’t even write, but it was here that my role pleased me. But I
couldn’t weary her—she went on listening without interrupting me, with
extraordinary attention and even awe, so that I myself finally became bored

and stopped; her look was sad, however, and there was something pitiful in
her face.
She finally got up to leave. Suddenly Touchard himself came in and, with
a foolishly important air, asked her: “Was she pleased with her son’s
progress?” Mama began murmuring and thanking him incoherently;
Antonina Vassilievna came in, too. Mama started asking them both “not to
abandon the little orphan, he’s the same as an orphan now, be his
benefactors . . .” and with tears in her eyes she bowed to them both, each
separately, with a deep bow, precisely as “simple folk” bow when they
come to ask important people about something. The Touchards weren’t
even expecting that, and Antonina Vassilievna was visibly softened and, of
course, at once changed her conclusion about the cup of coffee. Touchard,
with increased importance, replied humanely that he “made no distinction
among the children, that here they were all his children, and he their father,
and that he held me on almost the same footing with princely and senatorial
children, and that that should be appreciated,” and so on, and so forth.
Mama only kept bowing, but with embarrassment, finally turned to me, and
with tears glistening in her eyes, said, “Good-bye, darling!”
And she kissed me—that is, I allowed myself to be kissed. She obviously
would have liked to kiss me again and again, to embrace me, to hug me, but
whether she was ashamed to do it in front of people, or was bitter about
something else, or realized that I was ashamed of her, in any case, having
bowed once more to the Touchards, she hastily started for the door. I just
stood there.
“Mais suivez donc votre mère,” said Antonina Vassilievna. “Il n’a pas de
coeur cet enfant!”50
Touchard shrugged his shoulders in reply, which, of course, signified:
“It’s not for nothing I treat him as a lackey.”
I obediently followed mama downstairs; we went out to the porch. I
knew they were now all watching from the window. Mama turned to the
church and crossed herself deeply three times before it, her lips twitched,

the bell tolled densely and measuredly from the belfry. She turned to me
and—couldn’t help herself, she laid both hands on my head and wept over
it.
“Mama, come on . . . it’s shameful . . . they can see me from the window
. . .”
She roused herself and began to hurry:
“Well, the Lord . . . well, the Lord be with you . . . the angels in heaven,
the most-pure Mother, Saint Nicholas protect you . . . Lord, Lord!” she
repeated in a quick patter, crossing me all the while, trying quickly to make
as many crosses as possible, “my darling, my dear. But wait, darling . . .”
She hurriedly put her hand in her pocket and took out a handkerchief, a
blue checked handkerchief tightly knotted at the corner, and began to untie
the knot . . . but it wouldn’t come untied . . .
“Well, it makes no difference, take it with the handkerchief, it’s clean,
maybe you can use it, there are maybe four twenty-kopeck pieces in it,
maybe you’ll need it, forgive me, darling, it’s all I have . . . forgive me,
darling.”
I accepted the handkerchief, was about to observe that we “were very
well kept here by Mr. Touchard and Antonina Vassilievna, and that we
didn’t need anything,” but I restrained myself and took the handkerchief.
Once more she crossed me, once more she whispered some prayer, and
suddenly—and suddenly she bowed to me, too, just as she had to the
Touchards upstairs—a deep, long, slow bow—I’ll never forget it! I just
shuddered, and didn’t know why myself. What did she mean to say by this
bow: that she “acknowledged her guilt before me,” as I once thought up
long afterwards? I don’t know. But then I at once felt still more ashamed,
because “they were watching from up there, and Lambert might even start
beating me.”

She finally left. The princely and senatorial children had eaten the
oranges and gingerbreads before I came back, and Lambert took the four
twenty-kopeck pieces from me at once; they bought pastry and chocolate
with them in a pastry shop and didn’t even offer me any.
A whole half-year went by, and a windy and foul October came. I
completely forgot about mama. Oh, by then hatred, a dull hatred for
everything, had already penetrated my heart, saturating it completely;
though I brushed Touchard off as before, I already hated him with all my
might, and more and more every day. And it was then, once in the sad
evening twilight, that I began rummaging in my little drawer for some
reason, and suddenly saw her blue cambric handkerchief in the corner. It
had lain like that ever since I stuffed it there then. I took it out and looked it
over even with a certain curiosity; the end of the handkerchief still kept
traces of the former knot and even the clearly outlined round imprint of a
coin; however, I put the handkerchief back in its place and closed the
drawer. It was the eve of a holiday, and the bell began ringing for the vigil.
The pupils had gone home after dinner, but this time Lambert had stayed for
Sunday, I don’t know why no one had sent for him. Though he still beat me
then, as before, he used to tell me a great deal, and he needed me. We talked
all evening about Lepage pistols, which neither one of us had seen, about
Circassian sabers and how they cut, and about how good it would be to start
a band of robbers, and in the end Lambert got on to his favorite
conversation about a certain smutty subject, and though I wondered to
myself, I liked listening very much. But this time I suddenly couldn’t stand
it, and I told him I had a headache. At ten o’clock we went to bed; I pulled
the covers over my head and took the blue handkerchief from under the
pillow: for some reason I had gone an hour earlier to take it from the
drawer, and as soon as our beds were made, had put it under the pillow. I
pressed it to my face at once and suddenly began kissing it. “Mama,
mama,” I whispered, remembering, and my whole breast was clenched as in
a vise. I closed my eyes and saw her face with trembling lips, when she
crossed herself before the church, then crossed me, and I said to her, “It’s
shameful, they’re watching.” “Mama, dearest mama, just once in my life
you came to me . . . Dearest mama, where are you now, my faraway visitor?
Do you remember your poor boy now, the one you came to see? . . . Show

yourself to me now just one little time, come to me just only in a dream,
only so I can tell you how I love you, only so I can embrace you and kiss
your blue eyes, and tell you that I’m not ashamed of you at all now, and that
I loved you then, too, and that my heart ached then, but I only sat there like
a lackey. You’ll never know how I loved you then, mama! Dearest mama,
where are you now, can you hear me? Mama, mama, do you remember the
little dove, in the village? . . .”
“Ah, the devil . . . What ails him!” Lambert grumbles from his bed.
“Wait, I’ll show you! Won’t let me sleep . . .” He finally jumps out of bed,
runs over to me, and starts tearing the blanket off me, but I hold very, very
tightly to the blanket, covering my head with it.
“Whimpering, what are you whimpering for, cretin, cghretin! Take that!”
and he beats me, he hits me painfully with his fist on the back, on the side,
more and more painfully, and . . . and I suddenly open my eyes . . .
It’s already bright dawn, needles of frost sparkle on the snow, on the wall
. . . I’m sitting, crouched, barely alive, frozen in my fur coat, and someone
is standing over me, rousing me, abusing me loudly, and kicking me
painfully in the side with the toe of his right boot. I raise myself, look: a
man in a rich bearskin coat, a sable hat, with black eyes, pitch-black foppish
side-whiskers, a hooked nose, his white teeth bared at me, a white and
ruddy face like a mask . . . He has bent down very close to me, and cold
steam comes from his mouth with each breath:
“Frozen, the drunken mug, the cghretin! You’ll freeze like a dog! Get up!
Get up!”
“Lambert!” I shout.
“Who are you?”
“Dolgoruky!”
“What the hell kind of Dolgoruky?”

“Simply Dolgoruky! . . . Touchard . . . The one you stuck in the side with
a fork in the tavern! . . .”
“Ha-a-a!” he cries out, smiling some sort of long, recollecting smile (but
he can’t have forgotten me!). “Ha! So it’s you, you!”
He pulls me up, sets me on my feet; I can barely stand, barely move, he
leads me, supporting me on his arm. He peers into my eyes, as if pondering
and recalling and listening to me with all his might, and I babble on, also
with all my might, ceaselessly, without pause, and I’m so glad, so glad I’m
talking, and glad that it’s Lambert. Whether he appeared to me somehow as
my “salvation,” or I rushed to him at that moment because I took him for a
man from an entirely different world—I don’t know, I didn’t reason then,
but rushed to him without reasoning. What I said then I don’t remember at
all, and I hardly spoke coherently, hardly even articulated the words clearly;
but he listened intently. He grabbed the first cab that came along, and a few
moments later I was sitting in the warmth, in his room.

III
EVERY PERSON, WHOEVER he may be, certainly preserves some
recollection of something that has happened to him which he regards or is
inclined to regard as fantastic, remarkable, out of the ordinary, almost
miraculous, whether it’s a dream, a meeting, a divination, a presentiment, or
something of the sort. To this day I am inclined to regard this meeting of
mine with Lambert as something even prophetic . . . judging at least by the
circumstances and consequences of the meeting. It all happened, however,
on the one hand at least, in the most natural way: he was simply coming
back from one of his nighttime occupations (which one will become clear
later) half drunk, and, stopping for a moment by the gate in the lane, saw
me. He had been in Petersburg for only a few days then.
The room I found myself in was a small, quite unassumingly furnished
example of ordinary Petersburg chambres garnies51 of the middling sort.
Lambert himself, however, was excellently and expensively dressed. On the

floor lay two suitcases only half unpacked. A corner of the room was
partitioned off by a screen, concealing a bed.
“Alphonsine!” cried Lambert.
“Présente! ” 52 a cracked female voice replied in a Parisian accent from
behind the screen, and in no more than two minutes out popped Mlle.
Alphonsine, hastily dressed in a bed jacket, only just risen—a strange sort
of being, tall and lean as a splinter, a young girl, a brunette, with a long
waist, a long face, darting eyes, and sunken cheeks—an awfully worn-out
creature!
“Quick!” (I’m translating, but he spoke to her in French.) “They must
have a samovar going, fetch some boiling water, red wine and sugar, and a
glass here, quick, he’s frozen, this is a friend of mine . . . he slept all night
in the snow.”
“Malheureux! ”53 she cried out, clasping her hands with a theatrical
gesture.
“Uh-uh!” Lambert shouted at her as at a little dog, and shook his finger;
she stopped gesturing at once and ran to fulfill his order.
He examined and palpated me; he felt my pulse, touched my forehead,
my temples.
“Strange,” he muttered, “how you didn’t freeze . . . though you were all
covered up in your fur coat, including your head, like sitting in a fur hole . .
.”
The hot glass arrived, I gulped it down greedily, and it revived me at
once; I started babbling again; I was half-reclining on the sofa in the corner
and talking away—I was spluttering as I talked—but of precisely what and
how I was speaking, once again I have almost no recollection; there are
moments and even whole stretches that I’ve completely forgotten. I repeat:
whether he understood anything then from what I was telling, I don’t know;
but one thing I realized clearly afterwards—namely, that he managed to

understand me well enough to draw the conclusion that he ought not to
disregard his meeting with me . . . Later I’ll explain in its place what
reckoning he might have made here.
I was not only terribly animated, but at moments, it seems, quite merry. I
remember the sun suddenly lighting up the room when the blinds were
raised, and the stove crackling when someone lit it—who and how, I don’t
remember. I also have the memory of a tiny black dog that Mlle.
Alphonsine held in her arms, coquettishly pressing it to her heart. This
lapdog somehow diverted me very much, even so much that I stopped
talking and twice reached out for it, but Lambert waved his hand, and
Alphonsine and her lapdog instantly effaced themselves behind the screen.
He was very silent himself, sat facing me and, leaning strongly towards
me, listened without tearing himself away; at times he smiled a long,
drawn-out smile, baring his teeth and narrowing his eyes, as if making an
effort to think and wishing to guess. I’ve kept a clear recollection only of
the fact that, when I was telling him about the “document,” I simply
couldn’t express myself understandably and make a coherent story of it, and
by his face I could see only too well that he couldn’t understand me, but
that he wanted very much to understand, so that he even risked stopping me
with a question, which was dangerous, because as soon as I was interrupted,
I at once interrupted the subject and forgot what I was talking about. How
long we sat and talked like that I don’t know and can’t even reckon. He
suddenly got up and called Alphonsine:
“He needs rest; he may also need a doctor. Do whatever he asks, that is . .
. vous comprenez, ma fille? Vous avez de l’argent,54 no? Here!” And he
took out a ten-rouble note for her. He started whispering to her: “Vous
comprenez! Vous comprenez! ” he repeated to her, shaking his finger at her
and frowning sternly. I saw that she trembled frightfully before him.
“I’ll be back, and you’d best have a good sleep,” he smiled to me and
took his hat.

“Mais vous n’avez pas dormi du tout, Maurice! ” 55 Alphonsine cried out
pathetically.
“Taisez-vous, je dormirai après,” 56 and he left.
“Sauvée! ” 57; she whispered pathetically, pointing after him to me with
her hand.
“Monsieur, monsieur! ” she began declaiming at once, assuming a pose in
the middle of the room. “Jamais homme ne fut si cruel, si Bismarck, que cet
être, qui regarde une femme comme une saleté de hasard. Une femme,
qu’est-ce que ça dans notre époque? ‘Tue-la’—voilà le dernier mot de
l’Académie française!...” 58
I goggled my eyes at her; I was seeing double, there seemed to be two
Alphonsines in front of me . . . Suddenly I noticed that she was weeping,
gave a start, and realized that she had been talking to me for a very long
time now, which meant that during that time I had been asleep or
unconscious.
“. . . Hélas! de quoi m’aurait servi de le découvrir plutôt,” she
exclaimed, “et n’aurais-je pas autant gagné à tenir ma honte cachée toute
ma vie? Peut-être, n’est-il pas honnête à une demoiselle de s’expliquer si
librement devant monsieur, mais enfin je vous avoue, que s’il m’était permis
de vouloir quelque chose, oh, ce serait de lui plonger au coeur mon
couteau, mais en détournant les yeux, de peur que son regard exécrable ne
fit trembler mon bras et ne glaçât mon courage! Il a assassiné ce pope
russe, monsieur, il lui arracha sa barbe rousse pour la vendre à un artiste
en cheveux au pont des Maréchaux, tout près de la Maison de monsieur
Andrieux—hautes nouveautés, articles de Paris, linge, chemises, vous
savez, n’est-ce pas? . . . Oh, monsieur, quand l’amitié rassemble à table
épouse, enfants, soeurs, amis, quand une vive allégresse enflamme mon
coeur, je vous le demande, monsieur: est-il bonheur préférable à celui dont
tout jouit? Mais il rit, monsieur, ce monstre exécrable et inconcevable et si
ce n’était pas par l’entremise de monsieur Andrieux, jamais, oh, jamais je
ne serais . . . Mais quoi, monsieur, qu’avez vous, monsieur? ”59

She rushed to me: it seems I had a chill, and maybe had also swooned. I
can’t express what a painful, morbid impression this half-crazed being
made on me. Maybe she imagined that she had been ordered to entertain
me; at any rate she never left me for a moment. Maybe she had been on the
stage once; she declaimed awfully, fidgeted, talked nonstop, while I had
long been silent. All I could understand from her stories was that she was
closely connected with some “Maison de M. Andrieux—hautes nouveautés,
articles de Paris, etc.” and maybe even came from la Maison de M.
Andrieux, but she had somehow been torn forever from M. Andrieux par ce
monstre furieux et inconcevable,60 and this was what the tragedy consisted
in . . . She sobbed, but it seemed to me that it was only as a matter of course
and that she wasn’t crying at all; at times I fancied that she was suddenly
going to fall apart like a skeleton; she articulated her words in some
crushed, cracked voice; the word préférable, for instance, she pronounced
préfér-a-able and on the syllable a bleated like a sheep. Coming to my
senses once, I saw her making a pirouette in the middle of the room, yet she
wasn’t dancing, but this pirouette also had some relation to the story, and
she was only doing an impersonation. Suddenly she rushed and opened the
small, old, out-of-tune piano that was in the room, started strumming on it
and singing . . . It seems that for ten minutes or more I became completely
unconscious, fell asleep, but the lapdog squeaked and I came to: full
consciousness suddenly returned to me for a moment and lit me up with all
its light. I jumped up in horror.
“Lambert, I’m at Lambert’s!” I thought and, seizing my hat, I rushed for
my fur coat.
“Où allez-vous, monsieur? ”61 cried the keen-eyed Alphonsine.
“I want to get out, I want to leave! Let me go, don’t keep me . . .”
“Oui, monsieur! ” Alphonsine concurred with all her might, and rushed
to open the door to the corridor for me herself. “Mais ce n’est pas loin,
monsieur, c’est pas loin du tout, ça ne vaut pas la peine de mettre votre
chouba, c’est ici près, monsieur! ”62 she exclaimed to the whole corridor.
Running out of the room, I turned to the right.

“Par ici, monsieur, c’est par ici! ”63 she exclaimed with all her might,
clutching at my coat with her long, bony fingers, and with her other hand
pointing me to the left somewhere down the corridor, where I had no wish
to go. I tore myself free and ran for the door to the stairs.
“Il s’en va, il s’en va! ”64; Alphonsine raced after me, shouting in her
cracked voice. “Mais il me tuera, monsieur, il me tuera!”65 But I had
already run out to the stairs, and though she even raced after me down the
stairs, I managed to open the outside door, run out to the street, and jump
into the first cab. I gave mama’s address . . .

IV
BUT CONSCIOUSNESS, having flashed for a moment, quickly went out. I
still have a slight memory of how I was brought in and taken to mama’s, but
there I fell almost at once into complete oblivion. The next day, as I was
told later (though this I also remembered myself ), my reason became clear
again for a moment. I remembered myself in Versilov’s room on his sofa; I
remember the faces of Versilov, mama, Liza around me, remember very
well how Versilov spoke to me about Zershchikov, about the prince, showed
me some letter, reassured me. They told me later that I kept asking in horror
about some Lambert, and kept hearing the barking of some lapdog. But the
faint light of consciousness quickly dimmed; by evening of this second day
I was already totally delirious. But I’ll forestall events and explain them
beforehand.
When I ran out of Zershchikov’s that evening and everything calmed
down somewhat there, Zershchikov, having started the game, suddenly
announced in a loud voice that a lamentable error had occurred: the lost
money, the four hundred roubles, had been found in a pile of other money
and the accounts of the bank proved to be perfectly correct. Then the prince,
who had remained in the hall, accosted Zershchikov and demanded
insistently that he make a public declaration of my innocence and, besides
that, offer his apologies in the form of a letter. Zershchikov, for his part,
found the demand worthy of respect and gave his word, in front of
everybody, to send me a letter of explanation and apology the next day. The

prince gave him Versilov’s address, and indeed the very next day Versilov
personally received from Zershchikov a letter in my name and over thirteen
hundred roubles that belonged to me and that I had forgotten on the roulette
table. Thus ended the affair at Zershchikov’s. This joyful news contributed
greatly to my recovery when I regained consciousness.
The prince, on coming back from gambling, wrote two letters that same
night, one to me, and the other to his former regiment, where he had had the
incident with Ensign Stepanov. He sent both letters the next morning. After
which he wrote a report to his superiors, and with this report in hand, early
in the morning, he went in person to the commander of his regiment and
announced to him that he, “a common criminal, a partner in counterfeiting
the ——sky shares, surrenders himself into the hands of justice and asks to
be put on trial.” With that he handed over the report, in which it was all
explained in writing. He was arrested.
Here is the letter he wrote to me that night, word for word:
Priceless Arkady Makarovich,
Having tried the lackeyish “way out,” I have thereby lost the right to
comfort my soul at least somewhat with the thought that I, too, was finally
able to venture upon a righteous deed. I am guilty before my fatherland and
before my family, and for that, as the last of my family, I am punishing
myself. I do not understand how I could have seized upon the base thought
of self-preservation and dreamed for some time of buying myself back from
them with money. All the same, I myself, before my own conscience, would
have remained forever a criminal. Those people, even if they did return the
compromising notes to me, would never have left me all my life! What
remained then: to live with them, to be one with them all my life—that was
the lot that awaited me! I could not accept it, and finally found in myself
enough firmness, or maybe just despair, to act as I am acting now.
I have written a letter to my former regiment, to my former comrades,
and vindicated Stepanov. In this act there is not and cannot be any

redeeming deed: it is all just the dying bequest of tomorrow’s dead man.
That is how it must be regarded.
Forgive me for turning away from you in the gambling house; it was
because I was not sure of you at that moment. Now that I am a dead man, I
can make such confessions . . . from the other world.
Poor Liza! She knows nothing of this decision; may she not curse me, but
judge for herself. I cannot justify myself and do not even find words to
explain anything to her. Know also, Arkady Makarovich, that yesterday, in
the morning, when she came to me for the last time, I revealed my deceit to
her and confessed that I had gone to Anna Andreevna with the intention of
proposing to her. I could not leave that on my conscience before the last,
already taken decision, seeing her love, and so I revealed it to her. She
forgave me, forgave me everything, but I did not believe her; it was not
forgiveness; in her place I would not be able to forgive.
Remember me.
Your unfortunate last Prince Sokolsky.
I lay unconscious for exactly nine days.

PART THREE

Chapter One
I
NOW ABOUT SOMETHING completely different.
I keep announcing: “something different, something different,” and I
keep scribbling away about myself alone. Yet I’ve already declared a
thousand times that I don’t want to describe myself at all, and I firmly
didn’t want to when I began my notes; I understand only too well that the
reader hasn’t got the slightest need of me. I’m describing and want to
describe others, and not myself, and if I keep turning up all the time, that is
a sad mistake, because I simply can’t avoid it, however much I wish to.
Above all, it vexes me that, in describing my own adventures with such
ardor, I thereby give reason for thinking that I’m the same now as I was
then. The reader will remember, however, that I’ve already exclaimed more
than once: “Oh, if only one could change the former and start completely
anew!” I wouldn’t be able to exclaim like that if I hadn’t changed radically
now and become a totally different person. That is all too obvious; and you
can’t imagine how sick I am of all these apologies and prefaces that I’m
forced to squeeze every minute even into the very middle of my notes!
To business.
After nine days of unconsciousness, I came to my senses regenerated, but
not reformed; my regeneration, however, was stupid, naturally, if it’s taken
in the vast sense, and maybe if it were now, it wouldn’t be so. The idea, that
is, the feeling, again consisted (as a thousand times before) only in the fact
that I should leave them completely, but this time leave without fail, and not
as before, when I set myself the same topic a thousand times and never
could do it. I didn’t want revenge on anyone, and I give my word of honor
on that—though I had been offended by everyone. I was going to leave
without disgust, without curses, but I wanted my own strength, and genuine

this time, not dependent on any of them or the whole world; for I was all
but reconciled with everything in the world! I record this dream of mine not
as a thought, but as an irresistible feeling at that time. I didn’t want to
formulate it yet, while I was in bed. Sick and without strength, lying in
Versilov’s room, which they set aside for me, I was painfully aware of what
a low degree of strengthlessness I had come to: some sort of little straw, not
a man, lolled there in bed, and not only on account of illness—and how
offensive that was to me! And so, from the very depths of my being, from
all my strength, a protest began to rise, and I choked with a feeling of
boundlessly exaggerated arrogance and defiance. I don’t even remember a
time in my whole life when I was more filled with arrogant feelings than in
those first days of my recovery, that is, when the little straw lolled in bed.
But for the moment I was silent and even decided not to think about
anything! I kept peeking into their faces, trying to guess everything I
needed by them. It was evident that they did not wish to ask questions or
show curiosity either, but talked to me about completely irrelevant things. I
liked that and at the same time it upset me; I won’t explain this
contradiction. I saw Liza more rarely than mama, though she came to see
me every day and even twice a day. From bits of their conversation and
from the whole look of them I concluded that Liza had accumulated an
awful lot of cares, and that she was even frequently away from home
because of her affairs. For me it was as if the mere idea of the possibility of
“her own affairs” already contained something offensive; however, these
were all just sick, purely physiological feelings, which are not worth
describing. Tatyana Pavlovna also came to see me almost daily, and though
she wasn’t gentle with me at all, at least she didn’t abuse me as before,
which vexed me in the extreme, so that I simply said to her, “Tatyana
Pavlovna, when you’re not abusing me, you’re a great bore.” “Well, then I
won’t come to see you,” she snapped, and left. And I was glad to have
chased at least one of them away.
Most of all I tormented mama and got very irritated with her. I suddenly
had a terrible appetite, and I grumbled a lot that the food came late (but it
never came late). Mama didn’t know how to please me. Once she brought
me soup and, as usual, began to feed me herself, but I kept grumbling while

I ate. And suddenly I became vexed that I was grumbling: “She’s maybe the
only one I love, and it’s her that I torment.” But my anger wouldn’t subside,
and I suddenly burst into tears from anger, and she, poor dear, thought I was
weeping from tenderness, leaned over, and started kissing me. I restrained
myself and somehow endured it and actually hated her in that second. But I
always loved mama, loved her then, too, and didn’t really hate her, but it
was what always happens: the one you love most is the first one you insult.
The only one I did hate in those first days was the doctor. This doctor
was a young man with a presumptuous air, who spoke sharply and even
impolitely. As if all those people in science, just yesterday and suddenly,
had found out something special, whereas nothing special had happened
yesterday; but “the middle” and “the street ” are always that way. I endured
for a long time, but in the end suddenly burst out and declared to him,
before all our people, that he needn’t drag himself here, that I’d get well
without him, that he, though he had the look of a realist, was filled with
nothing but prejudice and didn’t understand that medicine had never yet
cured anyone; that finally, in all probability, he was grossly uneducated,
“like all our present-day engineers and specialists, who have lately started
turning up their noses at us.” The doctor was very offended (proving what
he was by that alone), yet he continued to visit. I finally announced to
Versilov that if the doctor did not stop coming, I’d tell him something ten
times more unpleasant. Versilov only observed that it was impossible to say
anything even twice more unpleasant than what had been said, let alone ten
times. I was glad he had noticed that.
What a man, though! I’m speaking of Versilov. He, he alone, was the
cause of it all—and yet he was the only one I wasn’t angry with then. It
wasn’t only his manner with me that won me over. I think we felt mutually
then that we owed each other many explanations . . . and that, precisely for
that reason, it would be best never to explain. It is extremely agreeable, on
such occasions in life, to run into an intelligent person! I have already
mentioned in the second part of my story, running ahead, that he gave me a
very brief and clear account of the arrested prince’s letter to me, about
Zershchikov, about his explanation in my favor, and so on. Since I had
decided to be silent, I put to him, with all possible dryness, only two or

three very brief questions; he answered them clearly and precisely, but
entirely without superfluous words and, what was best of all, without
superfluous feelings. I was afraid of superfluous feelings then.
About Lambert I say nothing, but the reader has, of course, guessed that I
thought all too much about him. In my delirium, I spoke several times about
Lambert; but once I came out of my delirium and could observe attentively,
I quickly realized that everything about Lambert remained a secret, and that
they knew nothing, not excepting Versilov. I was glad then, and my fear
went away, but I was mistaken, as I found out later, to my astonishment: he
had come to see me during my illness, but Versilov said nothing about it,
and I concluded that for Lambert I had already sunk into oblivion.
Nevertheless I often thought about him; what’s more, I thought not only
without disgust, not only with curiosity, but even with concern, as if
anticipating here something new, a way out that corresponded to the new
feelings and plans that were being born in me. In short, I proposed to think
Lambert over first of all, once I decided to start thinking. I’ll add one
strange thing: I had completely forgotten where he lived and on what street
it had all happened then. The room, Alphonsine, the little dog, the corridor
—all that I remembered; I could paint a picture of it all now; but where it
had all happened, that is, on what street and in what house—I had
completely forgotten. And what’s strangest of all, I figured it out only on
my third or fourth day of full consciousness, when I had long begun to be
concerned with Lambert.
And so, such were my first sensations upon my resurrection. I’ve
indicated only the most superficial, and very probably was unable to
indicate the important. In fact, maybe it was precisely then that everything
important was being defined and formulated in my heart; surely I didn’t
spend the whole time being vexed and angry only because they hadn’t
served me my broth. Oh, I remember how sad I could be then, and how
grieved I sometimes was in those moments, especially when I was left alone
for a long time. And they, as if on purpose, quickly understood that I felt
oppressed with them and that their sympathy annoyed me, and they started
leaving me alone more and more often: an unnecessarily subtle perceptivity.

II
ON MY FOURTH day of consciousness, I was lying in my bed between
two and three o’clock in the afternoon, and there was no one with me. It
was a clear day, and I knew that after three, when the sun would be setting,1
its slanting red ray would strike straight into the corner of my wall, and
there would be a bright spot of light there. I knew it from the previous days,
and the fact that it would unfailingly happen in an hour, and, above all, that
I knew it beforehand, like two times two, angered me to the point of spite. I
turned my whole body convulsively, and suddenly, amidst the deep silence,
clearly heard the words: “Lord Jesus Christ, our God, have mercy on us.”
The words were pronounced in a half-whisper, followed by a deep, fullchested sigh, and then everything became perfectly still again. I quickly
raised my head.
Earlier, that is, the day before, and even two days before, I had begun to
notice something peculiar in our three downstairs rooms. In that little room
across the drawing room, which used to be mama’s and Liza’s, there was
apparently someone else. More than once I had heard some sort of sounds
during the daytime and at night, but it was all for moments, the briefest
moments, then total silence would set in again at once for several hours, so
that I paid no attention. The day before, the thought had occurred to me that
it was Versilov there, the more so as he had come to my room soon
afterwards, though I knew for certain from their own conversations that
Versilov had moved somewhere to another apartment during the time of my
illness, and spent his nights there. And about mama and Liza I had long
known that (for the sake of my tranquillity, I thought) they had both moved
upstairs, to my former “coffin,” and I had even thought once to myself,
“How can the two of them have enough room there?” And now it suddenly
turns out that some man is living in their old room and that the man is not
Versilov at all. With an ease I wouldn’t have supposed I had (imagining till
then that I was totally strengthless), I lowered my feet from the bed, put
them into my slippers, threw on a gray lambskin robe that lay next to me
(and had been donated to me by Versilov), and set out across our living
room to mama’s former bedroom. What I saw there totally confounded me;

I had never anticipated anything like it, and stopped as if rooted to the
threshold.
There sat a very gray-haired old man with a big, awfully white beard, and
it was clear that he had been sitting there for a long time. He sat not on the
bed but on mama’s little bench, and only leaned his back against the bed.
However, he held himself so straight that it seemed he didn’t need any
support, though he was obviously ill. Over his shirt he wore a jacket lined
with sheepskin, his knees were covered with mama’s plaid, there were
slippers on his feet. One could tell that he was tall and broad-shouldered,
and he looked quite hale, despite his illness, though somewhat pale and
thin. He had an oblong face, very thick hair, but not too long, and he
seemed to be over seventy. Beside him on a little table, within his reach, lay
three or four books and a pair of silver spectacles. Though I hadn’t had the
least thought of meeting him, I guessed that same moment who he was,
only I still couldn’t figure out how he had sat there all those days, almost
next to me, so quietly that up to then I had never heard a thing.
He didn’t stir when he saw me, but gazed at me intently and silently, as I
did at him, with the difference that I gazed with boundless astonishment,
and he without the least. On the contrary, having scrutinized the whole of
me, to the last line, in those five or ten seconds of silence, he suddenly
smiled and even laughed softly and inaudibly, and though the laughter
passed quickly, its bright, mirthful trace remained on his face, and above all
in his eyes, very blue, radiant, big, but with lids slightly drooping and
swollen with age and surrounded by countless tiny wrinkles. This laughter
of his affected me most of all.
I think that when a person laughs, in the majority of cases he becomes
repulsive to look at. Most often something banal is revealed in people’s
laughter, something as if humiliating for the laugher, though the laughing
one almost always knows nothing of the impression he makes. Just as he
doesn’t know, as nobody generally knows, what kind of face he has when
he’s asleep. Some sleepers have intelligent faces even in sleep, while other
faces, even intelligent ones, become very stupid in sleep and therefore
ridiculous. I don’t know what makes that happen; I only want to say that a

laughing man, like a sleeping one, most often knows nothing about his face.
A great many people don’t know how to laugh at all. However, there’s
nothing to know here: it’s a gift, and it can’t be fabricated. It can only be
fabricated by re-educating oneself, developing oneself for the better, and
overcoming the bad instincts of one’s character; then the laughter of such a
person might quite possibly change for the better. A man can give himself
away completely by his laughter, so that you suddenly learn all his
innermost secrets. Even indisputably intelligent laughter is sometimes
repulsive. Laughter calls first of all for sincerity, but where is there any
sincerity in people? Laughter calls for lack of spite, but people most often
laugh spitefully. Sincere and unspiteful laughter is mirth, but where is there
any mirth in our time, and do people know how to be mirthful? (About
mirth in our time—that was Versilov’s observation, and I remembered it.) A
man’s mirth is a feature that gives away the whole man, from head to foot.
Someone’s character won’t be cracked for a long time, then the man bursts
out laughing somehow quite sincerely, and his whole character suddenly
opens up as if on the flat of your hand. Only a man of the loftiest and
happiest development knows how to be mirthful infectiously, that is,
irresistibly and goodheartedly. I’m not speaking of his mental development,
but of his character, of the whole man. And so, if you want to discern a man
and know his soul, you must look, not at how he keeps silent, or how he
speaks, or how he weeps, or even how he is stirred by the noblest ideas, but
you had better look at him when he laughs. If a man has a good laugh, it
means he’s a good man. Note at the same time all the nuances: for instance,
a man’s laughter must in no case seem stupid to you, however merry and
simplehearted it may be. The moment you notice the slightest trace of
stupidity in someone’s laughter, it undoubtedly means that the man is of
limited intelligence, though he may do nothing but pour out ideas. Or if his
laughter isn’t stupid, but the man himself, when he laughs, for some reason
suddenly seems ridiculous to you, even just slightly—know, then, that the
man has no real sense of dignity, not fully in any case. Or, finally, if his
laughter is infectious, but for some reason still seems banal to you, know,
then, that the man’s nature is on the banal side as well, and all the noble and
lofty that you noticed in him before is either deliberately affected or
unconsciously borrowed, and later on the man is certain to change for the

worse, to take up what’s “useful” and throw his noble ideas away without
regret, as the errors and infatuations of youth.
I am intentionally placing this long tirade about laughter here, even
sacrificing the flow of the story, for I consider it one of the most serious
conclusions of my life. And I especially recommend it to those would-be
brides who are ready to marry their chosen man, but keep scrutinizing him
with hesitation and mistrust, and can’t make the final decision. And let them
not laugh at the pathetic adolescent for poking with his moral admonitions
into the matter of marriage, of which he doesn’t understand the first thing.
But I understand only that laughter is the surest test of a soul. Look at a
child: only children know how to laugh perfectly—that’s what makes them
seductive. A crying child is repulsive to me, but a laughing and merry child
is a ray from paradise, a revelation from the future, when man will finally
become as pure and simplehearted as a child. And so something childlike
and incredibly attractive also flashed in the fleeting laughter of this old
man. I went up to him at once.

III
“SIT, SIT A WHILE, must be your legs don’t stand firm yet,” he invited me
affably, pointing to the place next to him and continuing to look into my
face with the same radiant gaze. I sat down next to him and said:
“I know you, you’re Makar Ivanovich.”
“So I am, dear heart. And it’s a fine thing that you got up. You’re a young
man, it’s a fine thing for you. An old man looks towards the grave, but a
young man must live.”
“But are you ill?”
“I am, my friend, the legs mostly; they brought me as far as the doorstep,
but once I sat down here, they got swollen. It came over me last Thursday,
when the degrees set in” (N.B.—that is, when the frost set in). “I’ve been
rubbing them with ointment so far, you see; two years ago Lichten, the

doctor, Edmund Karlych, prescribed it to me in Moscow, and the ointment
helped, oh, it helped; well, but now it’s stopped helping. And my chest is
blocked up, too. And since yesterday it’s the back as well, like dogs nipping
at me . . . I don’t sleep nights.”
“How is it I haven’t heard you here at all?” I interrupted. He looked at me
as if he was trying to figure something out.
“Just don’t wake your mother,” he added, as if recalling something. “She
fussed around me all night here, and so inaudibly, like a fly; but now I know
she’s lying down. Ah, it’s bad for a sick old man,” he sighed. “Not much for
the soul to hang on to, it seems, but still it holds on, but still it’s glad of the
world; and, it seems, if you were to begin your whole life over again, the
soul mightn’t fear even that; though maybe such a thought is sinful.”
“Why sinful?”
“It’s a dream, this thought, and an old man ought to depart in a handsome
way. Again, if you meet death with murmuring or displeasure, it’s a great
sin. Well, but if you love life out of spiritual mirth, then I suppose God will
forgive, even if you’re an old man. It’s hard for a man to know about every
sin, what’s sinful and what’s not; there’s a mystery here that passes human
reason. An old man should be pleased at all times, and he should die in the
full flower of his mind, blessedly and handsomely, full of days, sighing at
his last hour and rejoicing, departing like the ear to its sheaf, and fulfilling
his mystery.”
“You keep saying ‘mystery’; what is this ‘fulfilling his mystery’?” I
asked, and looked back at the door. I was glad that we were alone and that
there was undisturbed silence around us. The sun was shining brightly
through the window before sunset. He spoke somewhat grandiloquently and
imprecisely, but very sincerely and with some strong excitement, as if he
was indeed so glad of my coming. But I noticed that he was undoubtedly in
a feverish condition and even a strong one. I was also sick, also in a fever,
from the moment I went in to him.

“What is a mystery? Everything is a mystery, my friend, there is God’s
mystery in everything. Every tree, every blade of grass contains this same
mystery. Whether it’s a small bird singing or the whole host of stars shining
in the sky at night—it’s all one mystery, the same one. And the greatest
mystery of all is what awaits the human soul in the other world. That’s how
things are, my friend!”
“I don’t know in what sense . . . Of course, I’m not saying it to tease you,
and, believe me, I do believe in God, but all these mysteries have long been
revealed by the human mind, and what hasn’t been revealed will be
revealed, quite certainly and maybe in the nearest time. Botany has perfect
knowledge of how trees grow, physiologists and anatomists even know why
birds sing, or will know it soon, and as for the stars, they’ve not only all
been counted, but all their movements have been calculated to the minute,
so that it’s possible to predict the appearance of some comet a thousand
years ahead . . . and now even the composition of the remotest stars has
become known. Take a microscope—it’s like a magnifying glass that
magnifies objects a million times—and examine a drop of water through it,
and you’ll see a whole new world there, a whole life of living beings, and
yet this was also a mystery, but now it has been revealed.”
“I’ve heard of that, dear heart, more than once I’ve heard it from people.
There’s nothing to say, it’s a great and glorious thing; everything has been
given over to man by the will of God; it’s not for nothing that God blew
into him the breath of life: ‘Live and know.’”
“Well, that’s a commonplace. Anyhow, you’re not an enemy of science,
not a clericalist? That is, I don’t know if you’ll understand . . .”
“No, dear heart, from my youth I’ve respected learning, and though I
have no knowledge myself, I don’t murmur about that; if I don’t have it,
someone else does. And maybe it’s better that way, because to each his
own. Because, my dear friend, not everyone profits from learning. They’re
all intemperate, they all want to astonish the whole universe, and I might
want it more than anyone, if I were clever. But not being clever at all now,
how can I exalt myself, when I don’t know anything? You’re young and

sharp, and that’s the lot that has fallen to you, you must study. Learn
everything, so that when you meet a godless or mischievous man, you can
give him answers, so that he won’t hurl insensate words at you and confuse
your immature thoughts. And that glass I saw not so long ago.”
He paused for breath and sighed. I had decidedly given him great
pleasure by coming. He had a morbid desire for communication. Besides
that, I will decidedly not be mistaken if I maintain that he looked at me, at
moments, even with some extraordinary love: he placed his hand on my
arm caressingly, stroked my shoulder . . . well, but at moments, I must
confess, he seemed to forget all about me, as though he were sitting alone,
and while he went on speaking ardently, it was as if somewhere into the air.
“In St. Gennady’s hermitage, my friend,” he went on, “there’s a man of
great intelligence. He’s of a noble family and a lieutenant-colonel by rank,
and he possesses great wealth. While he lived in the world, he did not want
to commit himself to marriage; he withdrew from the world ten years ago
now, loving peace and silent havens and resting his senses from worldly
vanities. He observes the whole monastic rule, but he doesn’t want to be
tonsured. And of books, my friend, he has so many, I’ve never seen anyone
have so many—he told me himself it was eight thousand roubles’ worth.
Pyotr Valeryanych he’s called. He taught me much at various times, and I
loved listening to him exceedingly. I said to him once, ‘How is it, sir, that
with such great intelligence as yours, and living for ten years now in
monastic obedience and the complete cutting off of your will—how is it
that you don’t accept honorable tonsuring so as to be more perfect?’ And to
that he replied, ‘How can you go talking about my intelligence, old man?
Maybe it’s my intelligence that holds me captive, and not I who control it.
And how can you discuss my obedience? Maybe I lost my measure long
ago. And about the cutting off of my will? I could give away my money this
very moment, and give up my rank, and put all my medals on the table this
very moment, but for ten years I’ve struggled to give up my tobacco pipe,
and I can’t. What kind of monk am I after that, and what is this cutting off
of my will that you praise?’ And I was astonished then at this humility.
Well, so last summer, during the Peter and Paul fast,2 I came to that
hermitage again—the Lord brought me—and I saw that very thing—a

microscope—standing in his cell—he had ordered it from abroad for a lot
of money. ‘Wait, old man,’ he says, ‘I’ll show you an astonishing thing,
because you’ve never seen it before. You see a drop of water pure as a tear,
well, then look at what there is in it, and you’ll see that the mechanics will
soon search out all the mysteries of God and won’t leave a single one for
you and me’—that’s what he said. I remember it. And I had already looked
through a microscope thirty-five years ago, at Alexander Vladimirovich
Malgasov’s, our master, Andrei Petrovich’s uncle on his mother’s side,
whose estate went to Andrei Petrovich after his death. He was an important
squire, a big general, and kept a big pack of hounds, and I lived for many
years as his huntsman. It was then that he also set up this microscope, he
brought it with him and told all the servants to come and look, one by one,
both the male and the female sex, and they were shown a flea, and a louse,
and the point of a needle, and a hair, and a drop of water. And it was funny:
they were afraid to go look, and they were afraid of the master, too—he was
hot-tempered. Some didn’t even know how to look, they squinted one eye
but didn’t see anything, others got scared and shouted, and the headman
Savin Makarov covered his eyes with both hands and shouted, ‘Do what
you want with me—I won’t look!’ There was a lot of empty laughter.
However, I didn’t tell Pyotr Valeryanych that I had seen this same wonder
before, thirty-five years ago, because I saw the man took great pleasure in
showing it, so I began, on the contrary, to marvel and be terrified. He
waited a while and then asked, ‘Well, old man, what do you say now?’ And
I straightened myself up and said, ‘The Lord said: Let there be light, and
there was light.’ But to that he suddenly replied, ‘And wasn’t there
darkness?’ And he said it so strangely, not even smiling. I was astonished at
him then, but he even seemed a little angry and fell silent.”
“Quite simply, your Pyotr Valeryanych eats kutya3 in the monastery and
bows, but doesn’t believe in God, and you happened onto such a moment—
that’s all,” I said. “And on top of that, he’s a rather ridiculous man: he had
probably already seen a microscope ten times before, why did he lose his
mind the eleventh time? Some sort of nervous impressionability . . . worked
up in the monastery.”

“He’s a pure man and of lofty mind,” the old man said imposingly, “and
he’s not godless. He has a solid mind, but his heart is uneasy. There are a
great many such people now, come from gentle-folk and of learned rank.
And I’ll say this as well: the man punishes himself. But you avoid them and
don’t vex them, and remember them in your prayers before sleep at night,
for such men seek God. Do you pray before sleep?”
“No, I consider it empty ritualism. I must confess, however, that I like
your Pyotr Valeryanych: at least he’s not made of straw, but a human being,
somewhat resembling a certain man close to us both, whom we both know.”
The old man paid attention only to the first part of my answer.
“It’s too bad you don’t pray, my friend; it’s a good thing, it gladdens the
heart, before sleep, and rising from sleep, and waking up in the night. That I
can tell you. In summer, in the month of July, we were hastening to the
Bogorodsky Monastery for the feast. The closer we came to the place, the
more people joined us, and finally almost tenscore people came together, all
hurrying to kiss the holy and incorrupt relics of two great wonder-workers,
Aniky and Grigory. We spent the night in the fields, brother, and I woke up
early in the morning, everybody was still asleep, and the sun hadn’t even
peeked out from behind the forest yet. I raised my head, my dear, gazed
about me, and sighed: inexpressible beauty everywhere! All’s still, the air’s
light; the grass is growing—grow, grass of God; a bird’s singing—sing, bird
of God; a baby squeals in a woman’s arms—the Lord be with you, little
person, grow and be happy, youngling! And for the first time in my life it
was as if I contained it all in myself . . . I lay down again and fell asleep so
easily. It’s good in the world, my dear! If I mended a bit, I’d go again in the
spring. And that it’s a mystery makes it even better; your heart fears and
wonders, and this fear gladdens the heart: ‘All is in thee, Lord, and I am in
thee, and so receive me!’ Don’t murmur, young one: it’s all the more
beautiful that it’s a mystery,” he added tenderly.
“‘It’s even more beautiful that it’s a mystery . . .’ I’ll remember those
words. You express yourself terribly imprecisely, but I understand . . . It
strikes me that you know and understand much more than you can express;

only it’s as if you’re in delirium . . .” escaped me, looking at his feverish
eyes and pale face. But it seems he didn’t hear my words.
“Do you know, my dear young one,” he began again, as if continuing his
former speech, “do you know that there’s a limit to the memory of a man on
this earth? The limit to the memory of a man is set at just a hundred years.
A hundred years after a man’s death, his children or grandchildren, who
have seen his face, can still remember him, but after that, though his
memory may persist, it’s just orally, mentally, for all who have seen his face
will have passed on. And his grave in the cemetery will overgrow with
grass, its white stone will chip away, and all people will forget him, even
his own posterity, then his very name will be forgotten, for only a few
remain in people’s memory—and so be it! And let me be forgotten, my
dears, but I’ll love you even from the grave. I hear your merry voices, little
children, I hear your footsteps on your parents’ graves on forefathers’ day;4
live under the sun meanwhile, rejoice, and I’ll pray to God for you, I’ll
come to you in a dream . . . it’s all the same and there is love after death! . .
.”
Mainly, I was in as much of a fever as he was; and instead of leaving or
persuading him to calm down, and maybe putting him on the bed, because
he seemed to be quite delirious, I suddenly seized him by the hand and,
leaning towards him and pressing his hand, said in an excited whisper and
with tears in my soul:
“I’m glad of you. Maybe I’ve been waiting for you a long time. I don’t
love any of them; they have no seemliness . . . I won’t go after them, I don’t
know where I’ll go, I’ll go with you . . .”
But, fortunately, mama suddenly came in, otherwise I don’t know where
it would have ended. She came in with a just-awakened and alarmed face, a
vial and a tablespoon in her hands. Seeing us, she exclaimed:
“I just knew it! I’m late giving him his quinine, he’s all in a fever! I
overslept, Makar Ivanovich, dear heart!”

I got up and left. She gave him the medicine anyway and laid him down
in bed. I also lay down in mine, but in great agitation. I went back with
great curiosity and thought as hard as I could about this encounter. What I
expected from it then—I don’t know. Of course, I was reasoning
incoherently, and not thoughts but only fragments of thoughts flashed
through my mind. I lay with my face to the wall, and suddenly in the corner
I saw the bright spot of light from the setting sun, the one I had been
waiting for earlier with such a curse, and I remember it was as if my whole
soul leaped up and a new light penetrated my heart. I remember that sweet
moment and do not want to forget it. It was just a moment of new hope and
new strength . . . I was recovering then, and therefore such impulses might
have been the inevitable consequence of the state of my nerves; but I
believe in that bright hope even now—that’s what I want to write down now
and remember. Of course, I also knew firmly then that I wouldn’t go
wandering with Makar Ivanovich and that I myself didn’t know what this
new yearning was that had come over me, but I had uttered one phrase,
though in delirium: “There’s no seemliness in them!” “That’s it,” I thought,
beside myself, “from this moment on I’m seeking ‘seemliness,’ but they
don’t have it, and for that I’ll leave them.”
Something rustled behind me. I turned: mama stood bending over me and
peeking into my eyes with timid curiosity. I suddenly took her by the hand.
“And why didn’t you tell me anything about our dear guest, mama?” I
asked suddenly, myself almost not expecting I’d say it. All anxiety left her
face at once, and it was as if joy lit up in it, but she answered me with
nothing except a single phrase:
“Liza, don’t forget Liza either; you’ve forgotten Liza.”
She spoke it in a quick patter, blushing, and wanted to leave quickly,
because she also awfully disliked smearing feelings around, and in this
respect was just like me, that is, shy and chaste; besides, naturally, she
wouldn’t have wanted to start on the theme of Makar Ivanovich with me;
what we could say by exchanging looks was enough. But I, who precisely
hated any smearing around of feelings, it was I who stopped her forcefully

by the hand; I looked sweetly into her eyes, laughed softly and tenderly, and
with my other hand stroked her dear face, her sunken cheeks. She bent
down and pressed her forehead to mine.
“Well, Christ be with you,” she said suddenly, straightening up and
beaming all over, “get well. I’ll credit you with that. He’s sick, very sick . . .
Life is in God’s will . . . Ah, what have I said, no, it can’t be that! . . .”
She left. All her life, in fear and trembling and awe, she had greatly
respected her lawful husband, the wanderer Makar Ivanovich, who had
magnanimously forgiven her once and for all.

Chapter Two
I
BUT I HAD NOT “forgotten” Liza, mama was mistaken. The sensitive
mother saw what seemed to be a cooling off between brother and sister, but
it was not a matter of not loving, but sooner of jealousy. In view of what
follows, I’ll explain in a couple of words.
Ever since the prince’s arrest, a sort of arrogant pride had appeared in
poor Liza, a sort of unapproachable haughtiness, almost unbearable; but
everyone in the house understood the truth and how she was suffering, and
if I pouted and frowned in the beginning at her manner with us, it was
solely from my own petty irritability, increased tenfold by illness—that’s
how I think of it now. No, I never stopped loving Liza but, on the contrary,
loved her still more, only I didn’t want to approach her first, though I
understood that she wouldn’t come to me first for anything.
The thing was that as soon as everything was revealed about the prince,
right after his arrest, Liza, first of all, hastened to assume such a position
with regard to us and to anyone you like, as though she couldn’t admit even
the thought that she could be pitied or in any way comforted, or the prince
justified. On the contrary—trying not to have any explanations or
arguments with anyone—it was as if she were constantly proud of her
unfortunate fiancé’s action as of the highest heroism. It was as if she were
saying to us all every moment (I repeat: without uttering a word): “No,
none of you would do such a thing, none of you would give yourself up
from the demands of honor and duty; none of you has such a sensitive and
pure conscience! And as for his deeds, who doesn’t have bad deeds on his
soul? Only everybody hides them, and this man wished rather to ruin
himself than remain unworthy in his own eyes.” That is what her every
gesture apparently expressed. I don’t know, but I would have done exactly
the same thing in her place. I also don’t know whether she had the same

thoughts in her soul, that is, to herself; I suspect not. With the other, clear
half of her mind, she must certainly have perceived all the worthlessness of
her “hero”; for who would not agree now that this unfortunate and even
magnanimous man was at the same time in the highest degree a worthless
man? Even this very arrogance and snappishness, as it were, with all of us,
this constant suspicion that we thought differently of him, partly allowed for
the surmise that in the secret places of her heart she might have formed
another opinion of her unfortunate friend. I hasten to add, however, for my
own part, that in my opinion she was at least half right; for her it was even
more forgivable than for the rest of us to hesitate in her ultimate conclusion.
I myself confess with all my heart that, to this day, when everything has
already passed, I absolutely do not know how or at what to ultimately
evaluate this unfortunate man, who set us all such a problem.
Nevertheless, on account of it the house nearly became a little hell. Liza,
who loved so strongly, must have suffered very much. By her character, she
preferred to suffer silently. Her character was like mine, that is,
domineering and proud, and I always thought, both then and now, that she
came to love the prince precisely because, having no character, he
submitted fully to her domination, from the first word and hour. That
happens in one’s heart somehow of itself, without any preliminary
calculation; but such love, of a strong person for a weak one, is sometimes
incomparably stronger and more tormenting than the love of equal
characters, because one involuntarily takes upon oneself the responsibility
for one’s weak friend. So I think at least. All of us, from the very beginning,
surrounded her with the tenderest care, especially mama; but she didn’t
soften, didn’t respond to sympathy, and as if rejected all help. At first she
still spoke with mama, but every day she grew more and more sparing of
words, more abrupt and even hard. She asked Versilov’s advice at first, but
soon she chose Vasin as her adviser and helper, as I was surprised to learn
later . . . She went to see Vasin every day, also went to the courts, to the
prince’s superiors, went to the lawyers, the prosecutor; in the end she spent
almost whole days away from home. Naturally, twice every day she visited
the prince, who was confined in prison, in a section for the nobility, but
these meetings, as I became fully convinced later, were very painful for
Liza. Naturally, a third person cannot know fully what goes on between two

lovers. But it is known to me that the prince deeply insulted her all the time
—and how, for instance? Strangely enough, by constant jealousy; however,
of that later; but I’ll add one thought to it: it’s hard to decide which of them
tormented the other more. Proud of her hero among us, Liza may have
treated him quite differently when they were alone, as I firmly suspect, on
the basis of certain facts, of which, however, also later.
And so, as for my feelings and relations with Liza, everything that was
on the surface was only an affected, jealous falsehood on both sides, but
never did the two of us love each other more strongly than at that time. I’ll
add, too, that towards Makar Ivanovich, from his very appearance among
us, Liza, after the first surprise and curiosity, began for some reason to
behave herself almost disdainfully, even condescendingly. It was as if she
deliberately paid not the slightest attention to him.
Having promised myself to “keep silent,” as I explained in the previous
chapter, in theory, of course, that is, in my dreams, I thought to keep my
promise. Oh, with Versilov, for instance, I would sooner speak about
zoology or the Roman emperors than, for instance, about her, or about, for
instance, that most important line in his letter to her, where he informed her
that “the document has not been burned, but is alive and will emerge”—a
line I immediately began to ponder to myself again, as soon as I managed to
recover and come to reason after my fever. But alas! with my first steps in
practice, and almost before any steps, I realized how difficult and
impossible it was to keep myself to such a predetermination: on the very
next day after my first acquaintance with Makar Ivanovich, I was awfully
disturbed by one unexpected circumstance.

II
I WAS DISTURBED by the unexpected visit of Nastasya Egorovna,5 the
mother of the deceased Olya. I had heard from mama that she had come
twice during my illness and was very interested in my health. Whether this
“good woman,” as my mother always referred to her, came specifically on
my account, or was simply visiting mama, following the previously
established order—I didn’t ask. Mama always told me about everything at

home, usually when she came with soup to feed me (when I still couldn’t
eat by myself ), in order to entertain me; while I persistently tried to show
each time that this information had little interest for me, and therefore I
didn’t ask for any details about Nastasya Egorovna, and even remained
quite silent.
It was around eleven o’clock. I was just about to get out of bed and move
to the armchair by the table when she came in. I purposely stayed in bed.
Mama was very busy with something upstairs and did not come down when
she arrived, so that we suddenly found ourselves alone with each other. She
sat down facing me, on a chair by the wall, smiling and not saying a word. I
anticipated a game of silence; and generally her coming made a most
irritating impression on me. I didn’t even nod to her and looked directly into
her eyes; but she also looked directly at me.
“It must be boring for you alone in that apartment, now that the prince is
gone?” I asked suddenly, losing patience.
“No, sir, I’m no longer in that apartment. Through Anna Andreevna, I’m
now looking after his baby.”
“Whose baby?”
“Andrei Petrovich’s,” she said in a confidential whisper, looking back at
the door.
“But Tatyana Pavlovna’s there . . .”
“Tatyana Pavlovna and Anna Andreevna, the both of them, sir, and
Lizaveta Makarovna also, and your mother . . . everybody, sir. Everybody’s
taking part. Tatyana Pavlovna and Anna Andreevna are now great friends
with each other, sir.”
News to me. She became very animated as she spoke. I looked at her
with hatred.
“You’ve become very animated since the last time you called on me.”

“Oh, yes, sir.”
“Grown fat, it seems.”
She looked at me strangely.
“I’ve come to like her very much, sir, very much.”
“Who’s that?”
“Why, Anna Andreevna. Very much, sir. Such a noble young lady, and so
sensible . . .”
“Just so. And how is she now?”
“She’s very calm, sir, very.”
“She’s always been calm.”
“Always, sir.”
“If you’ve come to gossip,” I suddenly cried, unable to stand it, “know
that I don’t meddle with anything, I’ve decided to drop . . . everything,
everybody, it makes no difference to me—I’m leaving! . . .”
I fell silent, because I came to my senses. It was humiliating to me that I
had begun as if to explain my new goals to her. She listened to me without
surprise and without emotion, but silence ensued again. Suddenly she got
up, went to the door, and peeked out into the next room. Having made sure
there was no one there and we were alone, she quite calmly came back and
sat down in her former place.
“Nicely done!” I suddenly laughed.
“That apartment of yours, at the clerk’s, are you going to keep it, sir?”
she asked suddenly, leaning towards me slightly and lowering her voice, as
if this was the main question she had come for.

“That apartment? I don’t know. Maybe I’ll vacate it . . . How do I
know?”
“And your landlords are waiting very much for you; that clerk is in great
impatience, and so is his wife. Andrei Petrovich assured them that you’d
certainly come back.”
“But why did you ask?”
“Anna Andreevna also wanted to know; she was very pleased to learn
that you’re staying.”
“And how does she know so certainly that I’ll be sure to stay in that
apartment?”
I was about to add, “And what is it to her?”—but I refrained from asking
questions out of pride.
“And Mr. Lambert confirmed the same thing to them.”
“Wha-a-at?”
“Mr. Lambert, sir. And to Andrei Petrovich, too, he confirmed as hard as
he could that you would stay, and he assured Anna Andreevna of it.”
I was as if all shaken. What wonders! So Lambert already knows
Versilov, Lambert has penetrated as far as Versilov—Lambert and Anna
Andreevna—he has penetrated as far as her! Heat came over me, but I said
nothing. An awful surge of pride flooded my whole soul, pride or I don’t
know what. But it was as if I suddenly said to myself at that moment, “If I
ask for just one word of explanation, I’ll get mixed up with this world again
and never break with it.” Hatred kindled in my heart. I resolved with all my
might to keep silent and lay there motionlessly; she also fell silent for a
whole minute.
“What about Prince Nikolai Ivanovich?” I asked suddenly, as if losing
my reason. The thing was that I asked decidedly in order to divert the

theme, and once more, unwittingly, posed the most capital question,
returning again like a madman to that same world from which I had just so
convulsively resolved to flee.
“He’s in Tsarskoe Selo, sir.6 He’s been a bit unwell, and there’s fever
going around the city now, so everybody advised him to move to Tsarskoe,
to his own house there, for the good air, sir.”
I did not reply.
“Anna Andreevna and Mme. Akhmakov visit him every three days, they
go together, sir.”
Anna Andreevna and Mme. Akhmakov (that is, she) are friends! They go
together! I kept silent.
“They’ve become such friends, sir, and Anna Andreevna speaks so well
of Katerina Nikolaevna . . .”
I still kept silent.
“And Katerina Nikolaevna has ‘struck’ into society again, fête after fête,
she quite shines; they say even all the courtiers are in love with her . . . and
she’s quite abandoned everything with Mr. Bjoring, and there’ll be no
wedding; everybody maintains the same . . . supposedly ever since that
time.”
That is, since Versilov’s letter. I trembled all over, but didn’t say a word.
“Anna Andreevna is so sorry about Prince Sergei Petrovich, and Katerina
Nikolaevna also, sir, and everybody says he’ll be vindicated, and the other
one, Stebelkov, will be condemned . . .”
I looked at her hatefully. She got up and suddenly bent over me.
“Anna Andreevna especially told me to find out about your health,” she
said in a complete whisper, “and very much told me to ask you to call on

her as soon as you start going out. Good-bye, sir. Get well, sir, and I’ll tell
her so . . .”
She left. I sat up in bed, cold sweat broke out on my forehead, but it
wasn’t fear I felt: the incomprehensible and outrageous news about Lambert
and his schemes did not, for instance, fill me with horror at all, compared to
the fright—maybe unaccountable—with which I had recalled, both in my
illness and in the first days of recovery, my meeting with him that night. On
the contrary, in that first confused moment in bed, right after Nastasya
Egorovna’s departure, I didn’t even linger over Lambert, but . . . I was
thrilled most of all by the news about her, about her break-up with Bjoring,
and about her luck in society, about the fêtes, about her success, about her
“shining.” “She shines, sir”—I kept hearing Nastasya Egorovna’s little
phrase. And I suddenly felt that I did not have strength enough to struggle
out of this whirl, though I had been able to restrain myself, keep silent, and
not question Nastasya Egorovna after her wondrous stories! A boundless
yearning for this life, their life, took all my breath away and . . . and also
some other sweet yearning, which I felt to the point of happiness and
tormenting pain. My thoughts were somehow spinning, but I let them spin.
“What’s the point of reasoning!”—was how I felt. “Though even mama
didn’t let on to me that Lambert came by,” I thought in incoherent
fragments, “it was Versilov who told them not to let on . . . I’ll die before I
ask Versilov about Lambert!” “ Versilov,” flashed in me again, “Versilov
and Lambert—oh, so much is new with them! Bravo, Versilov! Frightened
the German Bjoring with that letter; he slandered her; la calomnie . . . il en
reste toujours quelque chose,66 and the German courtier got scared of a
scandal—ha, ha . . . there’s a lesson for her!” “Lambert . . . mightn’t
Lambert have gotten in with her as well? What else! Why couldn’t she get
‘connected’ with him as well?”
Here I suddenly left off thinking all this nonsense and dropped my head
back on the pillow in despair. “But that won’t be!” I exclaimed with
unexpected resolution, jumped up from the bed, put on the slippers, the
robe, and went straight to Makar Ivanovich’s room, as if there lay the
warding off of all obsessions, salvation, an anchor I could hold on to.

In fact it may be that I felt that thought then with all the forces of my
soul; otherwise why should I jump up from my place so irrepressibly then,
and in such a moral state rush to Makar Ivanovich?

III
BUT AT MAKAR Ivanovich’s, quite unexpectedly, I found people—mama
and the doctor. Since for some reason I had imagined to myself, going
there, that I would certainly find the old man alone, as the day before, I
stopped on the threshold in dumb perplexity. Before I had time to frown,
Versilov at once came to join them, and after him suddenly Liza as well . . .
Everybody, that is, gathered for some reason at Makar Ivanovich’s and “just
at the wrong time!”
“I’ve come to inquire about your health,” I said, going straight to Makar
Ivanovich.
“Thank you, dear, I was expecting you, I knew you’d come! I thought
about you during the night.”
He looked tenderly into my eyes, and it was evident to me that he loved
me almost best of all, but I instantly and involuntarily noticed that, though
his face was cheerful, the illness had made progress overnight. The doctor
had only just examined him quite seriously. I learned afterwards that this
doctor (the same young man with whom I had quarreled and who had been
treating Makar Ivanovich ever since his arrival) was quite attentive to his
patient and—only I can’t speak their medical language—supposed that he
had a whole complication of various illnesses. Makar Ivanovich, as I
noticed at first glance, had already established the closest friendly relations
with him. I instantly disliked that; but anyhow, I, too, of course, was in a
bad way at that moment.
“Indeed, Alexander Semyonovich, how is our dear patient today?”
Versilov inquired. If I hadn’t been so shaken, I would have been terribly
curious, first thing, to follow Versilov’s relations with this old man, which I
had already thought about the day before. I was struck most of all now by

the extremely soft and pleasant expression on Versilov’s face; there was
something perfectly sincere in it. I have already observed, I believe, that
Versilov’s face became astonishingly beautiful as soon as he turned the least
bit simplehearted.
“We keep on quarreling,” replied the doctor.
“With Makar Ivanovich? I don’t believe it; it’s impossible to quarrel with
him.”
“He won’t obey me; he doesn’t sleep at night . . .”
“Stop it now, Alexander Semyonovich, enough grumbling,” laughed
Makar Ivanovich. “Well, Andrei Petrovich, dear heart, what have they done
with our young lady? Here she’s been clucking and worrying all morning,”
he added, pointing to mama.
“Oh, Andrei Petrovich,” mama exclaimed, greatly worried indeed, “tell
us quickly, don’t torment us: what did they decide about the poor thing?”
“Our young lady has been sentenced!”
“Oh!” mama cried out.
“Not to Siberia, don’t worry—only to a fifteen-rouble fine. It turned into
a comedy!”
He sat down, the doctor sat down, too. They were talking about Tatyana
Pavlovna, and I still knew nothing at all about this story. I was sitting to the
left of Makar Ivanovich, and Liza sat down opposite me to the right; she
evidently had her own special grief today, with which she had come to
mama; the expression on her face was anxious and annoyed. At that
moment we somehow exchanged glances, and I suddenly thought to myself,
“We’re both disgraced, and I must make the first step towards her.” My
heart suddenly softened towards her. Versilov meanwhile began telling
about the morning’s adventure.

The thing was that Tatyana Pavlovna had gone before the justice of the
peace that morning with her cook. The case was trifling in the highest
degree; I’ve already mentioned that the spiteful Finn would sometimes keep
angrily silent even for whole weeks, not answering a word to her lady’s
questions; I’ve also mentioned that Tatyana Pavlovna had a weakness for
her, endured everything from her, and absolutely refused to dismiss her
once and for all. In my eyes, all these psychological caprices of old maids
and old ladies are in the highest degree worthy of contempt, and by no
means of attention, and if I venture to mention this incident here, it is solely
because later on, in the further course of my story, this cook is destined to
play a certain not inconsiderable and fateful role. And so, having lost
patience with this stubborn Finn, who hadn’t responded to her for several
days already, in the end Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly struck her, which had
never happened before. The Finn did not emit the slightest sound even then,
but that same day she got in touch with the retired midshipman Ossetrov,
who lived on the same back stairway somewhere in a corner below, and
who occupied himself with soliciting various sorts of cases, and, naturally,
with bringing such cases to court, in his struggle for existence. It ended with
Tatyana Pavlovna being summoned to the justice of the peace, and Versilov
for some reason had to give testimony at the hearing as a witness.
Versilov recounted it all jokingly and with extraordinary merriment, so
that even mama burst out laughing; he impersonated Tatyana Pavlovna, and
the midshipman, and the cook. The cook announced to the court right from
the start that she wanted a fine in money, “otherwise, if you put the lady in
prison, who am I going to cook for?” Tatyana Pavlovna answered the
judge’s questions with great haughtiness, not even deigning to justify
herself; on the contrary, she concluded with the words, “I beat her and I’ll
beat her more,” for which she was immediately fined three roubles for
insolent answers in court. The midshipman, a lean and lanky young man,
began a long speech in defense of his client, but got shamefully confused
and made the whole courtroom laugh. The hearing soon ended, and Tatyana
Pavlovna was sentenced to pay the injured Marya fifteen roubles. Without
delay, she took out her purse on the spot and started handing her the money.
The midshipman turned up at once and reached out his hand, but Tatyana
Pavlovna almost struck his hand aside and turned to Marya. “Never mind,

ma’am, you needn’t trouble yourself, add it to the accounts, and I’ll pay this
one myself.” “See, Marya, what a lanky fellow you picked for yourself !”
Tatyana Pavlovna pointed to the midshipman, terribly glad that Marya had
finally started to speak. “Lanky he is, ma’am,” Marya replied coyly. “Did
you order cutlets with peas for today? I didn’t quite hear earlier, I was
hurrying here.” “Oh, no, Marya, with cabbage, and please don’t burn it as
you did yesterday.” “I’ll do my best today especially, ma’am. Your hand,
please”—and she kissed her mistress’s hand as a sign of reconciliation. In
short, she made the whole courtroom merry.
“What a one, really!” Mama shook her head, very pleased both by the
news and by Andrei Petrovich’s account, but casting anxious glances at
Liza on the sly.
“She’s been a willful young lady from early on,” Makar Ivanovich
smiled.
“Bile and idleness,” the doctor retorted.
“Me willful, me bile and idleness?” Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly came in,
apparently very pleased with herself. “Alexander Semyonovich, you of all
people shouldn’t go talking nonsense; you knew when you were ten years
old what sort of idle woman I was, and as for my bile, you’ve been treating
it for a whole year and can’t cure it, so shame on you. Well, enough of your
jeering at me. Thank you, Andrei Petrovich, for taking the trouble to come
to court. Well, how are you, Makarushka, it’s you I’ve come to see, not this
one” (she pointed at me, but at the same time gave me a friendly pat on the
shoulder; I’d never seen her in such a merry state of mind before).
“Well, so?” she concluded, suddenly turning to the doctor and frowning
worriedly.
“This one doesn’t want to stay in bed, but sitting up like this only wears
him out.”
“I’ll just sit a wee bit with people,” Makar Ivanovich murmured, his face
as pleading as a child’s.

“Yes, we love that, we do; we love chatting in a little circle, when people
gather round us; I know Makarushka,” said Tatyana Pavlovna.
“And, oh, what a speedy one he is,” the old man smiled again, turning to
the doctor. “And you don’t give ear to speech; wait, let me say it. I’ll lie
down, dear heart, I’ve heard, but to our minds what it means is, ‘Once you
lie down, you may not get up again’—that, my friend, is what’s standing
back of me.”
“Well, yes, I just knew it, a popular prejudice: ‘I’ll lie down, yes,’ they
say, ‘and for all I know, I won’t get up again’—that’s what people are very
often afraid of, and they’d rather spend the time of their illness on their feet
than go to the hospital. And you, Makar Ivanovich, are simply yearning,
yearning for your dear freedom, for the open road; that’s all your illness;
you’re not used to living in the same place for long. Aren’t you what’s
known as a wanderer? Well, and with our people vagrancy almost turns into
a passion. I’ve noticed it more than once in our people. Our people are
mostly vagrants.”
“So Makar is a vagrant, in your opinion?” Tatyana Pavlovna picked up.
“Oh, not in that sense; I was using the word in its general sense. Well, so
he’s a religious vagrant, a pious one, but a vagrant all the same. In a good,
respectable sense, but a vagrant . . . From a medical point of view, I . . .”
“I assure you,” I suddenly addressed the doctor, “that the vagrants are
sooner you and I, and everybody else here, and not this old man, from
whom you and I have something to learn, because there are firm things in
his life, and we, all of us here, have nothing firm in our lives . . . However,
you could hardly understand that.”
It appears I spoke cuttingly, but that’s what I had come for. In fact, I don’t
know why I went on sitting there and was as if out of my mind.
“What’s with you?” Tatyana Pavlovna looked at me suspiciously. “So,
how did you find him, Makar Ivanovich?” she pointed her finger at me.

“God bless him, a sharp boy,” the old man said with a serious air; but at
the word “sharp” almost everybody burst out laughing. I restrained myself
somehow; the doctor laughed most of all. It was bad enough that I didn’t
know then about their preliminary agreement. Three days earlier, Versilov,
the doctor, and Tatyana Pavlovna had agreed to try as hard as they could to
distract mama from bad anticipations and apprehensions for Makar
Ivanovich, who was far more ill and hopeless than I then suspected. That’s
why everybody joked and tried to laugh. Only the doctor was stupid and,
naturally, didn’t know how to joke: that’s why it all came out as it did later
on. If I had also known about their agreement, I wouldn’t have done what
came out. Liza also knew nothing.
I sat and listened with half an ear; they talked and laughed, but in my
head was Nastasya Egorovna with her news, and I couldn’t wave her away.
I kept picturing her sitting and looking, getting up cautiously and peeking
into the other room. Finally they all suddenly laughed. Tatyana Pavlovna, I
have no idea on what occasion, had suddenly called the doctor a godless
person: “Well, you little doctors, you’re all godless folk! . . .”
“Makar Ivanovich!” the doctor cried out, pretending most stupidly that he
was offended and was seeking justice, “am I godless or not?”
“You, godless? No, you’re not godless,” the old man replied sedately,
giving him an intent look. “No, thank God!” he shook his head. “You’re a
mirthful man.”
“And whoever is mirthful isn’t godless?” the doctor observed ironically.
“That’s a thought—in its own way!” Versilov observed, but not laughing
at all.
“It’s a powerful thought!” I exclaimed inadvertently, struck by the idea.
The doctor looked around questioningly.
“These learned people, these same professors,” Makar Ivanovich began,
lowering his eyes slightly (they had probably been saying something about
professors before then), “oh, how afraid of them I was at first: I didn’t dare

before them, for I feared the godless man most of all. There’s one soul in
me, I thought; if I lose it, there’s no other to find. Well, but then I took
heart. ‘So what,’ I thought, ‘they’re not gods, they’re like us, fellowsufferering men the same as us.’ And I had great curiosity: ‘I must find out
what this godlessness is!’ Only later, my friend, this same curiosity also
went away.”
He fell silent, though intending to continue with that quiet and sedate
smile. There is a simpleheartedness that trusts each and everyone,
unsuspecting of mockery. Such people are always limited, for they’re ready
to bring out the most precious thing from their hearts before the first comer.
But in Makar Ivanovich, it seemed to me, there was something else, and it
was something else that moved him to speak, not merely the innocence of
simpleheartedness. It was as if a propagandist peeped out of him. I had the
pleasure of catching a certain as if sly smile that he directed at the doctor,
and maybe at Versilov as well. The conversation was evidently a
continuation of their previous arguments during the week; but into it, to my
misfortune, there again slipped that same fatal little phrase that had so
electrified me the day before, and it led me to an outburst that I regret to
this day.
“I might be afraid of the godless man even now,” the old man went on
with concentration, “only the thing is, my friend Alexander Semyonovich,
that I’ve never once met a godless man, what I’ve met instead is vain men
—that’s how they’d better be called. They’re all sorts of people; there’s no
telling what people: big and small, stupid and learned, even some of the
simplest rank, and it’s all vanity. For they read and talk all their lives, filled
with bookish sweetness, but they themselves dwell in perplexity and cannot
resolve anything. One is all scattered, no longer noticing himself. Another
has turned harder than stone, but dreams wander through his heart. Yet
another is unfeeling and light-minded and only wants to laugh out his
mockery. Another has merely plucked little flowers from books, and even
that by his own opinion; he’s all vanity himself, and there’s no judgment in
him. Again I’ll say this: there is much boredom. A small man may be
needy, have no crust, nothing to feed his little ones, sleep on prickly straw,
and yet his heart is always merry and light; he sins, he’s coarse, but still his

heart is light. But the big man drinks too much, eats too much, sits on a
heap of gold, yet there’s nothing but anguish in his heart. Some have gone
through all learning—and are still anguished. And my thinking is that the
more one learns, the more boredom there is. Take just this: they’ve been
teaching people ever since the world was made, but where is the good
they’ve taught, so that the world might become the most beautiful, mirthful,
and joy-filled dwelling place? And I’ll say another thing: they have no
seemliness, they don’t even want it; they’ve all perished, and each one only
praises his perdition, but doesn’t even think of turning to the one truth; yet
to live without God is nothing but torment. And it turns out that what gives
light is the very thing we curse, and we don’t know it ourselves. And what’s
the point? It’s impossible for a man to exist without bowing down; such a
man couldn’t bear himself, and no man could. If he rejects God, he’ll bow
down to an idol—a wooden one, or a golden one, or a mental one. They’re
all idolaters, not godless, that’s how they ought to be called. Well, but how
could there not be godless people as well? There are such as are truly
godless, only they’re much more frightening than these others, because they
come with God’s name on their lips. I’ve heard of them more than once, but
I’ve never met any. There are such, my friend, and I think there must needs
be.”
“There are, Makar Ivanovich,” Versilov suddenly confirmed, “there are
such, and ‘there must needs be.’”
“There certainly are and ‘there must needs be’!” escaped from me
irrepressibly and vehemently, I don’t know why; but I was carried away by
Versilov’s tone and was captivated as if by some sort of idea in the words
“there must needs be.” This conversation was totally unexpected for me.
But at that moment something suddenly happened that was also totally
unexpected.

IV
IT WAS AN extremely bright day; the blinds in Makar Ivanovich’s room
were usually not raised all day, on the doctor’s orders; but there was not a
blind but a curtain over the window, so that the uppermost part of the

window was uncovered; this was because the old man had been upset, with
the former blind, at not seeing the sun at all. And we just went on sitting
there till the moment when a ray of sunlight suddenly struck Makar
Ivanovich right in the face. He paid no attention at first, while he was
talking, but several times as he spoke he mechanically inclined his head to
the side, because the bright ray strongly troubled and irritated his ailing
eyes. Mama, who was standing next to him, had already glanced worriedly
at the window several times; she had simply to cover the window
completely with something, but, so as not to hinder the conversation, she
decided to try and pull the little bench Makar Ivanovich was sitting on a bit
to the right. She only had to move it five inches, six at the most. She had
bent down several times and taken hold of the bench, but she coudn’t pull
it; the bench, with Makar Ivanovich sitting on it, wouldn’t move. Feeling
her effort, but being in the heat of conversation, Makar Ivanovich, quite
unconsciously, tried several times to raise himself, but his legs wouldn’t
obey him. Mama nevertheless went on straining and pulling, and all this
finally angered Liza terribly. I remember her several flashing, irritated
glances, only in the first moment I didn’t know what to ascribe them to;
besides, I was distracted by the conversation. And then suddenly we heard
her almost shout sharply at Makar Ivanovich:
“At least raise yourself a little, you can see how hard it is for mama!”
The old man quickly glanced at her, understood at once, and instantly
hastened to raise himself, but nothing came of it; he rose a couple of inches
and fell back on the bench.
“I can’t, dear heart,” he answered Liza as if plaintively, looking at her
somehow all obediently.
“You can talk whole books full, but you haven’t got the strength to stir
yourself ?”
“Liza!” cried Tatyana Pavlovna. Makar Ivanovich again made an extreme
effort.

“Take your crutch, it’s lying beside you, you can raise yourself with your
crutch!” Liza snapped once more.
“Right you are,” said the old man, and at once hurriedly seized his
crutch.
“We simply have to lift him!” Versilov stood up, the doctor also moved,
Tatyana Pavlovna also jumped up, but before they had time to approach
him, Makar Ivanovich leaned on the crutch with all his strength, suddenly
rose, and stood where he was, looking around in joyful triumph.
“And so I got up!” he said with all but pride, smiling joyfully. “Thank
you, dear, for teaching me reason, and I thought my little legs wouldn’t
serve me at all . . .”
But he didn’t go on standing for long. He hadn’t even managed to finish
speaking when his crutch, on which he had rested the whole weight of his
body, suddenly slipped on the rug, and as his “little legs” hardly supported
him at all, he toppled from his full height onto the floor. This was almost
terrible to see, I remember. Everybody gasped and rushed to lift him up,
but, thank God, he hadn’t hurt himself; he had only struck the floor heavily,
noisily, with both knees, but he had managed to put his right hand in front
of him and brace himself with it. He was picked up and seated on the bed.
He was very pale, not from fright, but from shock. (The doctor had also
found a heart ailment in him, along with everything else.) But mama was
beside herself with fright. And suddenly Makar Ivanovich, still pale, his
body shaking, and as if not yet quite recovered, turned to Liza and in an
almost tender, quiet voice, said to her:
“No, dear, my little legs just won’t stand up! ”
I cannot express my impression at the time. The thing was that there
wasn’t the slightest sound of complaint or reproach in the poor old man’s
words; on the contrary, you could see straight off that, from the very
beginning, he had decidedly noticed nothing spiteful in Liza’s words, but
had taken her shouting at him as something due, that is, that he ought to
have been “reprimanded” for his fault. All this affected Liza terribly as

well. At the moment of his fall, she had jumped up, like everybody else,
and stood all mortified and, of course, suffering, because she had been the
cause of it all, but, hearing such words from him, she suddenly, almost
instantly, became flushed all over with the color of shame and repentance.
“Enough!” Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly commanded. “It all comes from
talk! Time we were in our places; what’s the good of it if the doctor himself
starts babbling!”
“Precisely,” Alexander Semyonovich picked up, bustling around the
patient. “I’m to blame, Tatyana Pavlovna, he needs rest!”
But Tatyana Pavlovna wasn’t listening: for half a minute she had been
silently and intently watching Liza.
“Come here, Liza, and kiss me, old fool that I am—if you want to,” she
said unexpectedly.
And she kissed her, I don’t know what for, but that was precisely what
needed to be done; so that I almost rushed myself to kiss Tatyana Pavlovna.
It was precisely necessary not to crush Liza with reproach, but to greet with
joy and felicitation the new beautiful feeling that undoubtedly must have
been born in her. But, instead of all these feelings, I suddenly stood up and
began, firmly rapping out the words:
“Makar Ivanovich, you have again used the word ‘seemliness,’ and just
yesterday and for all these days I’ve been suffering over that word . . . and
all my life I’ve been suffering, only before I didn’t know over what. I
consider this coincidence of words fateful, almost miraculous . . . I
announce it in your presence . . .”
But I was instantly stopped. I repeat: I didn’t know about their agreement
concerning mama and Makar Ivanovich; and judging by my former doings,
they certainly considered me capable of any scandal of that sort.
“Stifle him, stifle him!” Tatyana Pavlovna turned utterly ferocious.
Mama began to tremble. Makar Ivanovich, seeing everyone’s fright, also

became frightened.
“Arkady, enough!” Versilov cried sternly.
“For me, ladies and gentlemen,” I raised my voice still more, “for me to
see you all next to this babe” (I pointed to Makar) “is unseemly. There’s
only one saint here, and that’s mama, but she, too . . .”
“You’ll frighten him!” the doctor said insistently.
“I know I’m the whole world’s enemy,” I began to babble (or something
of the sort), but, turning around once more, I looked defiantly at Versilov.
“Arkady,” he cried again, “there has already been exactly the same scene
here between us! I beg you, restrain yourself now!”
I cannot express with what strong feeling he uttered this. Extreme
sadness, the most sincere, the fullest, was expressed in his features. Most
surprising of all was that he looked as if he were guilty: I was the judge, and
he was the criminal. All this finished me off.
“Yes!” I cried to him in reply, “there has already been exactly the same
scene, when I buried Versilov and tore him out of my heart . . . But then
there followed the resurrection from the dead, while now . . . now there will
be no dawn! but . . . but all of you here will see what I’m capable of! You
don’t even expect what I can prove!”
Having said this, I rushed to my room. Versilov ran after me . . .

V
I SUFFERED A relapse of my illness; I had a very strong attack of fever,
with delirium towards nightfall. But it was not all delirium: there were
countless dreams, a whole series and without measure, among which there
was one dream or fragment of a dream that I’ve remembered all my life. I’ll
recount it without any explanations. It was prophetic and I cannot omit it.

I suddenly found myself, with some grand and proud design in my heart,
in a big and lofty room; but not at Tatyana Pavlovna’s: I remember the room
very well; I make note of that, running ahead. But though I’m alone, I
constantly feel, with uneasiness and torment, that I’m not alone at all, that
I’m expected and that something is expected of me. Somewhere behind the
doors, people sit and expect me to do something. The sensation is
unbearable: “Oh, if only I were alone!” And suddenly she comes in. She
looks timid, she’s terribly afraid, she peeks into my eyes. The document is
in my hand. She smiles in order to charm me, she fawns on me; I’m sorry,
but I begin to feel disgust. Suddenly she covers her face with her hands. I
fling the “document ” on the table with inexpressible contempt: “Don’t beg,
take it, I need nothing from you! I revenge myself for all my insults with
contempt! ” I walk out of the room, breathless with immeasurable pride.
But in the doorway, in the darkness, Lambert seizes me: “Cghretin,
cghretin!” he whispers, holding me back by the arm with all his might.
“She’ll have to open a boarding school for high-born girls on Vassilievsky
Island” (N.B. that is, to support herself, if her father, learning about the
document from me, deprives her of her inheritance and drives her out of the
house. I set down Lambert’s words literally as I dreamed them).
“Arkady Makarovich is searching for ‘seemliness,’” comes Anna
Andreevna’s little voice, somewhere nearby, right there on the stairs; but it
is not praise but unbearable mockery that sounds in her words. I return to
the room with Lambert. But, seeing Lambert, she suddenly begins to
guffaw. My first impression is horrible fright, such fright that I stop and do
not want to go closer. I look at her and can’t believe it; it’s as if she has
suddenly taken a mask from her face: the same features, but as if each line
of her face has been distorted by boundless impudence. “The ransom, lady,
the ransom!” shouts Lambert, and the two of them guffaw still more, and
my heart sinks: “Oh, can this shameless woman possibly be the same one at
whose mere glance my heart boiled over with virtue?”
“That’s what they’re capable of, these proud ones, in their high society,
for money!” exclaims Lambert. But the shameless woman is not
embarrassed even by that; she guffaws precisely because I’m so frightened.
Oh, she’s ready for the ransom, I can see that and . . . and what’s with me? I

no longer feel either pity or loathing; I tremble as never before . . . I’m
overcome by a new, inexpressible feeling, such as I’ve never known, and
strong as the whole world . . . Oh, I’m no longer able to go away now for
anything! Oh, how I like that it’s so shameless! I seize her by the hands, the
touch of her hands makes me shiver painfully, I bring my lips to her
impudent crimson lips, trembling with laughter and inviting me.
Oh, away with this base memory! A cursed dream! I swear that before
this loathsome dream there had been nothing in my mind even resembling
this disgraceful thought! There hadn’t even been any involuntary thought of
that sort (though I kept the “document” sewn up in my pocket, and I would
sometimes snatch at my pocket with a strange smile). Where did this all
come from, quite ready-made? It’s because I had the soul of a spider! It
means that everything was already born and lying in my depraved heart,
lying in my desire, but in a waking state my heart was ashamed and my
mind still didn’t dare to imagine anything like that consciously. But in a
dream my soul herself presented and laid out all that was in my heart, with
perfect precision and in the fullest picture and—in prophetic form. And can
it have been this that I wanted to prove to them when I ran out of Makar
Ivanovich’s room that morning? But enough, nothing of that for the time
being! This dream I dreamed is one of the strangest adventures of my life.

Chapter Three
I
THREE DAYS LATER I got up in the morning and suddenly felt, standing
on my legs, that I wouldn’t stay in bed anymore. I fully felt the nearness of
recovery. All these little details are maybe not worth including, but then
came several days which, though nothing special happened, have all
remained in my memory as something delightful and calm, and that is a rare
thing in my memories. My inner state I will not meanwhile formulate; if the
reader learned what it consisted in, he certainly wouldn’t believe it. Better if
everything becomes clear later from the facts. And meanwhile I’ll just say
one thing: let the reader remember about the soul of a spider. And that in a
man who wanted to go away from them all and from the whole world in the
name of “seemliness”! The yearning for seemliness was there in the highest
degree, that was certainly so, but how it could be combined with God
knows what other yearnings—is a mystery to me. And it has always been a
mystery, and I’ve marveled a thousand times at this ability of man (and, it
seems, of the Russian man above all) to cherish the highest ideal in his soul
alongside the greatest baseness, and all that in perfect sincerity. Whether it’s
a special breadth in the Russian man, which will take him far, or simply
baseness—that’s the question!
But let’s leave that. One way or another, a lull came. I simply understood
that I had to get well at all costs and as soon as possible, so that I could
begin to act as soon as possible, and therefore I resolved to live hygienically
and obey the doctor (whoever he was), and with extreme reasonableness
(the fruit of breadth) I put off stormy designs till the day of my going out,
that is, till my recovery. How all these peaceful impressions and the
enjoyment of the lull could combine with a painfully sweet and anxious
throbbing of the heart at the anticipation of imminent, stormy decisions—I
don’t know, but, again, I attribute it all to “breadth.” But the former recent
restlessness was no longer in me; I put it all off for a while, no longer

trembling before the future as just recently, but like a rich man assured of
his means and powers. My arrogance and defiance of the fate awaiting me
swelled more and more, partly, I suppose, from my now actual recovery and
the quick return of my vital forces. It is these several days of final and even
actual recovery that I recall now with full pleasure.
Oh, they forgave me everything, that is, my outburst, and these were the
very same people I had called unseemly to their faces! I like that in people,
I call it intelligence of the heart; at least it attracted me at once—to a certain
degree, of course. Versilov and I, for instance, went on speaking like the
best acquaintances, but to a certain degree: as soon as there was a glimpse
of too much expansiveness (and there were glimpses), we both restrained
ourselves at once, as if a bit ashamed of something. There are occasions
when the victor can’t help being ashamed before the one he has vanquished,
precisely for having overcome him. The victor was obviously I; and I was
ashamed.
That morning, that is, when I got out of bed after the relapse of my
illness, he came to see me, and then I learned from him for the first time
about their agreement concerning mama and Makar Ivanovich; he also
observed that, though the old man felt better, the doctor would not answer
positively for him. I gave him my heartfelt promise to behave more
prudently in the future. As Versilov was telling me all that, I then suddenly
noticed for the first time that he himself was extremely and sincerely
concerned for this old man, that is, far more than I would have expected
from a man like him, and that he looked upon him as a being for some
reason especially dear to him, and not only because of mama. This
interested me at once, almost surprised me, and, I confess, without Versilov
I might out of inattention have missed and failed to appreciate much in this
old man, who left one of the most lasting and original impressions in my
heart.
Versilov seemed to have fears about my attitude towards Makar
Ivanovich; that is, he trusted neither my intelligence nor my tact, and
therefore he was extremely pleased later, when he discerned that I could
occasionally understand how to treat a person of totally different notions

and views—in short, that I was able to be both yielding and broad when
necessary. I also confess (without humiliating myself, I think) that in this
being who was from the people I found something totally new for me in
regard to certain feelings and views, something unknown to me, something
much clearer and more comforting than the way I myself had understood
these things before. Nevertheless, it was sometimes impossible not to get
simply beside oneself from certain decided prejudices which he believed
with the most shocking calmness and steadfastness. But here, of course,
only his lack of education was to blame, while his soul was rather well
organized, even so well that I’ve never yet come across anything better of
its kind in people.

II
WHAT WAS MOST attractive about him, as I’ve already noted above, was
his extreme candor and the absence of the slightest self-love; the feeling
was of an almost sinless heart. There was “mirth” of heart, and therefore
also “seemliness.” He loved the word “mirth” very much and used it often.
True, one sometimes found a sort of morbid rapture in him, as it were, a sort
of morbidity of tenderness—in part, I suppose, due also to the fever which,
truly speaking, never left him all that time; but that did not interfere with
the seemliness. There were also contrasts: alongside an astonishing
simpleheartedness, sometimes completely unaware of irony (often to my
vexation), there also lived in him a sort of clever subtlety, most often in
polemical clashes. And he liked polemics, but only occasionally and in his
own way. It was evident that he had walked a lot through Russia, had heard
a lot, but, I repeat, he liked tender feeling most of all, and therefore all that
led to it, and he himself liked to tell things that moved people to tenderness.
Generally he liked telling stories. I heard a lot from him both about his own
wanderings and various legends from the lives of the most ancient
“ascetics.” I’m not familiar with these things, but I think he distorted a lot
in these legends, having learned them mostly by word of mouth from
simple folk. It was simply impossible to accept certain things. But alongside
obvious alterations or simple lies, there were always flashes of something
astonishingly wholesome, full of popular feeling, and always conducive to
tenderness . . . Among these stories, for instance, I remember a long one,

“The Life of Mary of Egypt.”7 Up to that time I had had no conception of
this “Life,” nor of almost any like it. I’ll say outright: it was almost
impossible to endure it without tears, and not from tender feeling, but from
some sort of strange rapture. You felt something extraordinary and hot, like
that scorching sandy desert with its lions, in which the saint wandered.
However, I don’t want to speak of it, and am also not competent.
Besides tenderness, I liked in him certain sometimes extremely original
views of certain still quite disputable things in modern reality. He once told,
for instance, a recent story about a discharged soldier; he was almost a
witness to this event. A soldier came home from the service, back to the
peasants, and he didn’t like living with the peasants again, and the peasants
didn’t like him either. The man went astray, took to drinking, and robbed
somebody somewhere; there was no firm evidence, but they seized him
anyhow and took him to court. In court his lawyer all but vindicated him—
there was no evidence, and that was that—when suddenly the man listened,
listened, and suddenly stood up and interrupted the lawyer: “No, you quit
talking.” And he told everything “to the last speck”; he confessed
everything, with tears and repentance. The jury went and locked themselves
in for the decision, then suddenly they all come out: “No, not guilty.”
Everybody shouted, rejoiced, and the soldier just stood rooted to the spot, as
if he’d turned into a post, didn’t understand anything; nor did he understand
anything from what the magistrate told him in admonition as he let him go.
The soldier was set free again, and still didn’t believe it. He began to be
anguished, brooded, didn’t eat, didn’t drink, didn’t speak to people, and on
the fifth day he up and hanged himself. “That’s how it is to live with a sin
on your soul!” Makar Ivanovich concluded. This story is, of course, a
trifling one, and there’s an endless number of them now in all the
newspapers, but I liked the tone of it, and most of all a few little phrases,
decidedly with a new thought in them. Speaking, for instance, of how the
soldier returned to his village and the peasants didn’t like him, Makar
Ivanovich said, “And you know what a soldier is: a soldier is a peasant
gone bad.” Speaking later about the lawyer who all but won the case, he
also said: “And you know what a lawyer is: a lawyer is a hired conscience.”
He uttered both of these expressions without any effort and unaware of
having done so, and yet in these two expressions there is a whole special

view of both subjects, and though, of course, it doesn’t belong to the whole
people, still it’s Makar Ivanovich’s own and not borrowed! These ready
notions among the people to do with certain subjects are sometimes
wonderful in their originality.
“And how do you look at the sin of suicide, Makar Ivanovich?” I asked
him on the same occasion.
“Suicide is the greatest human sin,” he answered with a sigh, “but the
Lord alone is the only judge here, for He alone knows everything—every
limit and every measure. But we’re bounden to pray for such a sinner. Each
time you hear of such a sin, then before you go to sleep, pray for the sinner
tenderly; at least sigh for him to God; even if you didn’t know him at all—
your prayer for him will get through the better.”
“But will my prayer help him if he’s already condemned?”
“But how do you know? There are many, oh, many who don’t believe
and deafen ignorant people’s ears with it; but don’t listen, for they don’t
know where they’re straying themselves. A prayer from a still-living person
for a condemned one truly gets through. How is it for someone who has
nobody to pray for him? So when you stand and pray before you go to
sleep, add at the end: ‘And have mercy, Lord Jesus, on all those who have
nobody to pray for them.’ This prayer really gets through and is pleasing.
And also for all the sinners who are still living: ‘Lord, who knowest all
destinies, save all the unrepentant’—that’s also a good prayer.”
I promised him that I would pray, feeling that by this promise I would
give him the greatest satisfaction. And in fact joy shone in his face; but I
hasten to add that he never treated me condescendingly on such occasions,
that is, as an old man would treat some adolescent; on the contrary, he quite
often liked listening to me himself, even listened with delight, on various
themes, supposing that, though he had to do with a “young one,” as he put it
in his lofty style (he knew very well that the way to put it would be “youth,”
and not “young one”), at the same time this “young one,” as he understood,
was infinitely higher than he in education. He liked, for instance, to speak

very often about the hermitic life and placed the “hermitage” incomparably
higher than “wanderings.” I hotly objected to him, insisting on the egoism
of those people, who abandon the world and the benefit they might produce
for mankind solely for the egoistic idea of their own salvation. At first he
didn’t understand, I even suspect he didn’t understand at all; but he
defended the hermitic life very strongly: “At first you’re sorry for yourself,
of course (that is, when you’ve settled in the hermitage)—well, but after
that you rejoice more and more every day, and then you see God.” Here I
developed before him a full picture of the useful activity in the world of the
scholar, the doctor, or the friend of mankind in general, and I brought him
to real ecstasy, because I myself spoke ardently; he yessed me every
minute: “Right, dear, right, God bless you, you think according to the
truth.” But when I finished, he still did not quite agree: “That’s all so,” he
sighed deeply, “but how many are there who will endure and not get
distracted? Though money is not a god yet, it’s at least a half-god—a great
temptation; and then there’s the female sex, there’s self-conceit and envy.
So they’ll forget the great cause and busy themselves with the little one. A
far cry from the hermitic life. In the hermitage a man strengthens himself
even for every sort of deed. My friend! What is there in the world?” he
exclaimed with great feeling. “Isn’t it only a dream? Take some sand and
sow it on a stone; when yellow sand sprouts for you on that stone, then your
dream will come true in this world—that’s the saying among us. Not so
with Christ: ‘Go and give away your riches and become the servant of all.’
And you’ll become inestimably richer than before; for not only in food, nor
in costly clothing, nor in pride nor envy will you be happy, but in
immeasurably multiplied love. Not little riches now, not a hundred
thousand, not a million, but you’ll acquire the whole world! Now we gather
without satiety and squander senselessly, but then there will be no orphans
or beggars, for all are mine, all are dear, I’ve acquired them all, bought
them all to a man! Now it’s not a rare thing that a very rich and noble man
is indifferent to the number of his days, and doesn’t know what amusement
to think up; but then our days will multiply as if a thousandfold, for you
won’t want to lose a single minute, but will feel each one in your heart’s
mirth. And then you’ll acquire wisdom, not from books only, but you’ll be
with God himself face to face; and the earth will shine brighter than the sun,

and there will be neither sadness nor sighing, but only a priceless paradise .
. .”
It was these ecstatic outbursts that Versilov seemed to like greatly. That
time he was there in the room.
“Makar Ivanovich!” I interrupted him suddenly, growing excited myself
beyond all measure (I remember that evening), “but in that case it’s
communism you’re preaching, decidedly communism!”
And as he knew decidedly nothing about communist doctrine, and was
hearing the word itself for the first time, I immediately began to expound
for him everything I knew on the subject. I confess I knew little and that
confusedly, and I’m not quite competent now either, but what I knew I
expounded with great ardor, heedless of anything. To this day I recall with
pleasure the extraordinary impression I made on the old man. It wasn’t even
an impression, but almost a shock. At the same time he was terribly
interested in the historical details: “Where? How? Who set it up? Who said
it?” Incidentally, I’ve noticed that this is generally a quality of simple
people: they won’t be satisfied with a general idea, if they get very
interested, but will unfailingly demand the most firm and precise details. I
was confused about the details, though, and as Versilov was there, I was a
little embarrassed before him, and that made me still more excited. The end
was that Makar Ivanovich, moved to tenderness, finally could only repeat
“Right, right!” after each word, obviously without understanding and
having lost the thread. I became vexed, but Versilov suddenly interrupted
the conversation, stood up, and announced that it was time to go to bed. We
were all together then, and it was late. When he peeked into my room a few
minutes later, I asked him at once how he looked at Makar Ivanovich in
general, and what he thought of him. Versilov smiled merrily (but not at all
at my mistakes about communism—on the contrary, he didn’t mention
them). I repeat again: he decidedly cleaved, as it were, to Makar Ivanovich,
and I often caught an extremely attractive smile on his face as he listened to
the old man. However, the smile did not prevent criticism.

“Makar Ivanovich, first of all, is not a peasant, but a household serf,” he
pronounced with great readiness, “a former household serf and a former
servant, born a servant and from a servant. Household serfs and servants
shared a great deal in the interests of their masters’ private, spiritual, and
intellectual life in the old days. Note that Makar Ivanovich to this day is
interested most of all in the events of life among the gentry and in high
society. You don’t know yet to what degree he’s interested in certain recent
events in Russia. Do you know that he’s a great politician? He’d give
anything to know who is at war, and where, and whether we’ll go to war. In
former times I used to bring him to a state of bliss with such conversations.
He has great respect for science, and of all sciences he likes astronomy the
most. For all that, he has worked out something so independent in himself
that he won’t be budged from it for anything. He has convictions, firm ones,
rather clear . . . and true. For all his perfect ignorance, he’s capable of
astounding you by being unexpectedly familiar with certain notions you
wouldn’t suppose him to have. He delights in praising the hermitic life, but
not for anything would he go to a hermitage or a monastery, because he is
in the highest degree a ‘vagrant,’ as Alexander Semyonovich nicely called
him—with whom, to mention it in passing, you needn’t be angry. Well,
what else, finally: he’s something of an artist, has many words of his own,
but also not of his own. He’s somewhat lame in logical explanations, at
times very abstract; has fits of sentimentality, but of a completely popular
sort, or, better, has fits of that generally popular tenderness that our people
introduce so broadly into their religious feeling. Of his purity of heart and
lack of malice I won’t speak: it’s not for us to get started on that theme . . .”

III
TO FINISH WITH the characterization of Makar Ivanovich, I shall tell one
of his stories from his own private life. His stories had a strange character,
or rather, they had no general character at all; it was impossible to squeeze
any moral or any general trend out of them, unless it was that they were all
more or less moving. But there were also some that were not moving, that
were even quite merry, that even made fun of wayward monks, so that he
directly harmed his idea by telling them—which I pointed out to him; but
he didn’t understand what I meant to say. Sometimes it was hard to make

out what prompted him to this storytelling, so that I even wondered at such
loquacity and ascribed it in part to old age and to his ailing condition.
“He’s not what he used to be,” Versilov once whispered to me, “he used
to be not at all like this. He’ll die soon, much sooner than we think, and we
must be prepared.”
I forgot to mention that something like “evenings” had been established
among us. Besides mama, who wouldn’t leave Makar Ivanovich’s side,
Versilov always came to his little room in the evenings; I, too, always came,
and couldn’t be anywhere else; during the last few days, Liza almost always
came, though later than everyone else, and almost always sat silently.
Tatyana Pavlovna also came sometimes, though rarely, and sometimes the
doctor. It suddenly happened somehow that I became friends with the
doctor; not very much, but at least there were none of my former outbursts.
I liked his simplicity, as it were, which I finally discerned in him, and the
certain attachment he had to our family, so that I finally ventured to forgive
him his medical arrogance and, on top of that, taught him to wash his hands
and clean his fingernails, if he was incapable of wearing clean linen. I
explained to him directly that it was not at all for the sake of foppishness or
any sort of fine arts, but that cleanliness was a natural part of a doctor’s
profession, and I proved it to him. Finally, Lukerya often came to the door
from her kitchen and, standing behind it, listened to Makar Ivanovich’s
stories. Versilov once called her out from behind the door and invited her to
sit with us. I liked that; but from then on she stopped coming to the door.
Their ways!
I include one of his stories, without choosing, solely because I remember
it more fully. It’s a story about a merchant, and I think that in our towns, big
and small, such stories occur by the thousand, if only we know how to look.
Those who wish to can skip the story, the more so as I tell it in his style.

IV
AND IN THE town of Afimyevsk, I’ll tell you now, here’s what a wonder
we had. There lived a merchant named Skotoboinikov,8 Maxim Ivanovich,

and there was nobody richer than he in the whole region. He built a calico
factory and employed several hundred workers; and he became conceited
beyond measure. And it must be said that everything walked at a sign from
him, and the authorities themselves didn’t hinder him in anything, and the
abbot of the monastery thanked him for his zeal: he donated a lot to the
monastery, and when the fancy took him, he sighed greatly for his soul and
had no little concern for the age to come. He was a widower and childless;
about his wife, rumor had it that he sweetened her away in the first year and
that since his youth he had always liked making free with his hands; only
that was a very long time back; he never wanted to enter the bonds of
matrimony again. He also had a weakness for drink, and when the time
came on him, he would run drunkenly around town, naked and yelling; the
town was nothing grand, but still it was a shame. When the time was over,
he’d get irate, and then everything he decided was good, and everything he
ordered was wonderful. And he settled accounts with people arbitrarily;
he’d take an abacus, put his spectacles on: “How much for you, Foma?”
“Haven’t had anything since Christmas, Maxim Ivanovich, there’s thirtynine roubles owing to me.” “Oof, that’s a lot of money! It’s too much for
you; the whole of you isn’t worth such money; it doesn’t suit you at all;
let’s knock off ten roubles, and you’ll get twenty-nine.” The man says
nothing; and nobody else dares to make a peep, they all say nothing.
“I know how much he should be given,” he says. “It’s impossible to deal
with the people here any other way. The people here are depraved; without
me they’d all have died of hunger, however many there are. I say again, the
people here are thieves, whatever they see, they filch, there’s no manliness
in them. And again take this, that he’s a drunkard; give him money, he’ll
bring it to the pot-house and sit there naked, not a stitch left, he goes home
stripped. Again, too, he’s a scoundrel: he’ll sit on a stone facing the pothouse and start wailing: ‘Mother, dear, why did you give birth to me, bitter
drunkard that I am? It would be better if you’d smothered me, bitter
drunkard that I am, at birth!’ Is this a man? This is a beast, not a man; he
should be eddicated first of all and then be given money. I know when to
give it to him.”

So Maxim Ivanovich spoke about the people of Afimyevsk; though it
was bad what he said, all the same it was the truth: they were slack,
unsteady folk.
There lived in that same town another merchant, and he died; he was a
young and light-minded man, he went broke and lost all his capital. During
the last year he struggled like a fish on dry land, but his life had come full
term. He had been on bad terms with Maxim Ivanovich all the time, and
remained roundly in debt to him. In his last hour he still cursed Maxim
Ivanovich. And he left behind a widow, still young, and five children with
her. And to be left a solitary widow after your husband is like being a
swallow without a nest—no small ordeal, the more so with five little ones
and nothing to feed them: their last property, a wooden house, Maxim
Ivanovich was taking for debt. And so she lined them all up in a row by the
church porch; the eldest was a boy of eight, the rest were all girls with a
year’s difference between them, each one smaller than the next; the eldest
was four and the youngest was still nursing in her mother’s arms. The
liturgy was over, Maxim Ivanovich came out, and all the children knelt
before him in a row—she had taught them beforehand—and they pressed
their little palms together in front of them all as one, and she herself behind
them, with the fifth child in her arms, bowed down to the ground before
him in front of all the people: “Dear father, Maxim Ivanovich, have mercy
on the orphans, don’t take our last crust of bread, don’t drive us out of our
own nest!” And everybody there waxed tearful—she had taught them so
well. She thought, “He’ll take pride in front of the people, and forgive us,
and give the house back to the orphans,” only it didn’t turn out that way.
Maxim Ivanovich stopped: “You’re a young widow,” he said, “you want a
husband, it’s not the orphans you’re weeping about. And the deceased man
cursed me on his deathbed.” And he walked on and didn’t give them back
the house. “Why be indigent” (that is, indulgent) “of their foolishness? I’ll
do them a good turn, and they’ll berate me still more; nothing will be
accomplished, except that a great rumor will spread.” And there was, in
fact, a rumor that he had sent to this widow when she was still a young girl,
ten years before, and offered her a large sum (she was very beautiful),
forgetting that this sin was the same as desecrating God’s church; but he

hadn’t succeeded then. And he did not a few such abominations, in town
and even all over the province, and on this occasion even lost all measure.
The mother and her fledglings howled when he drove them orphaned
from the house, and not only out of wickedness, but like a man who
sometimes doesn’t know himself what makes him stand his ground. Well,
people helped her at first, and then she went to look for work. Only what
kind of work was there, except for the factory? She’d wash the floors here,
weed the vegetable patch there, stoke the stove in a bathhouse, all with the
baby in her arms, and start wailing, while the other four ran around outside
in nothing but their shirts. When she made them kneel by the church porch,
they still had some sort of shoes and some sort of coats, because anyhow
they were a merchant’s children; now they ran around barefoot: clothes
burn up on children, that’s a known fact. Well, what is that to children? As
long as the sun shines, they rejoice, they don’t sense their ruin, they’re like
little birds, their voices are like little bells. The widow thinks, “Winter will
come, and what am I going to do with you? If only God would take care of
you by then!” Only she didn’t have to wait till winter. There’s a children’s
disease in our parts, the whooping cough, that goes from one to another.
First of all the nursing girl died, after her the rest fell ill, and that same
autumn all four girls, one after the other, were carried off. True, one was run
over by horses in the street. And what do you think? She buried them and
started wailing; she had cursed them before, but once God took them, she
was sorry. A mother’s heart!
The only one left alive to her was the oldest boy, and she doted on him,
trembled over him. He was weak and delicate, and had a pretty face like a
girl’s. And she took him to the factory, to his godfather, who was a
manager, and got herself hired in the official’s family as a nanny. One day
the boy was running in the yard, and here suddenly Maxim Ivanovich came
driving up with a pair, and just then he was tipsy; and the boy ran down the
stairs straight at him, slipped accidentally, and bumped straight into him as
he was getting out of his droshky, punching him in the belly with both
hands. He seized the boy by the hair: “Whose boy is he? The birch! Whip
him right now, in front of me!” he yelled. The boy went numb, they started
thrashing him, he screamed. “So you scream, too? Whip him till he stops

screaming!” Maybe they whipped him a lot, maybe not, but he didn’t stop
screaming till he looked quite dead. Then they left off whipping him, they
got frightened, the boy wasn’t breathing, he lay there unconscious. Later
they said they hadn’t whipped him much, but he was very fearful. Maxim
Ivanovich also got frightened. “Whose boy is he?” he asked; they told him.
“Really now! Take him to his mother. Why was he loitering around the
factory?” For two days afterwards he said nothing and then asked again,
“How’s the boy?” And things were bad with the boy: he was sick, lying in
his mother’s corner, she left her job at the official’s because of it, and he
had an inflammation in his lungs. “Really now!” he said. “And why do you
think that is? It’s not that they whipped him painfully: they just gave him a
little treatment. I’ve ordered the same kind of beatings for others; it went
over without any such nonsense.” He expected the mother to go and make a
complaint, and, being proud, said nothing; only how could she, the mother
didn’t dare to make a complaint. And then he sent her fifteen roubles and a
doctor from himself; not because he was afraid or anything, but just so,
from pondering. And soon after that his time came, and he went on a threeweek binge.
Winter passed, and on the bright day of Christ’s resurrection itself, on the
great day itself, Maxim Ivanovich asked again, “And how’s that same boy?”
And for the whole winter he had said nothing, hadn’t asked. They say to
him, “He’s recovered, he’s with his mother, and she still does day labor.”
That very day Maxim Ivanovich drove to the widow’s, he didn’t go into the
house, but called her out to the gate, sitting in the droshky himself: “Here’s
what, honest widow,” he says, “I want to be a true benefactor to your son
and do no end of good things for him: from now on I’m taking him to live
with me, in my own house. And if he pleases me the least bit, I’ll make over
a sufficient capital to him; and if he really pleases me, I may set him up as
the heir to my whole fortune at my death, as if he were my own son, on
condition, however, that your honor doesn’t visit my house except on great
feast days.9 If that’s agreeable to you, bring the boy tomorrow morning, he
can’t go on playing knucklebones.” And having said that, he drove off,
leaving the mother as if out of her mind. People heard about it and said to
her, “The lad will grow up and reproach you that you deprived him of such

a destiny.” She spent the night weeping over him and in the morning she
brought the child. And the boy was more dead than alive.
Maxim Ivanovich dressed him like a young gentleman and hired a tutor,
and from that hour on had him sitting over books; and it reached the point
that he wouldn’t let him out of his sight, but always kept him with him. As
soon as the boy starts gaping, he shouts, “To your books! Study! I want to
make a man of you.” And the boy was sickly, he had been coughing ever
since that time, after the beating. “As if it’s not a fine life with me!” Maxim
Ivanovich marveled. “With his mother he just ran around barefoot, chewed
on crusts, why is he more sickly than ever?” And the tutor says to him,
“Every boy needs to romp and play,” he says, “he shouldn’t study all the
time, movement is necessary for him,” and he deduced it all for him
reasonably. Maxim Ivanovich thought, “It’s true what you say.” And this
tutor, Pyotr Stepanovich, God rest his soul, was like a holy fool;10 he drank
ver-ry much, so that it was even too much, and for that reason had long
been removed from any position, and he lived about town like a beggar, but
he had great intelligence and a solid education. “I shouldn’t have been
here,” he used to say of himself, “I should have been a professor at the
university, and here I sink into the mud and ‘even my garments hate my
flesh.’”11 Maxim Ivanovich sits and shouts at the boy, “Romp!”—and the
boy can barely breathe before him. It reached the point that the child
couldn’t bear his voice—he just started trembling all over. And Maxim
Ivanovich was still more surprised: “He’s neither this nor that; I took him
up from the dirt, dressed him in drap de dames; he’s got nice cloth
bootikins, an embroidered shirt, I keep him like a general’s son, why isn’t
he well disposed towards me? Why is he silent as a wolf cub?” And though
people had long ceased marveling at Maxim Ivanovich, here again they
began to wonder: the man’s out of his mind; latched onto the little child and
won’t let him be. “Upon my life, I’ll eradicate his character. His father
cursed me on his deathbed, after taking holy communion; he has his father’s
character.” He didn’t use the birch rod even once (was afraid ever since that
time). He intimidated him, that’s what. Intimidated him without the birch
rod.

And then the thing happened. Once he went out, and the boy left his book
and climbed on a chair. Earlier he had thrown a ball up onto the chiffonier,
and he wanted to get his ball, but he caught his sleeve on a china lamp that
stood on the chiffonier; the lamp crashed to the floor and broke into
smithereens, the clatter was heard all over the house, and it was a costly
object—Saxony china. And here suddenly Maxim Ivanovich heard it three
rooms away and yelled. The child rushed out and ran in fear wherever his
legs would take him, ran out to the terrace, and across the garden, and
through the back gate, straight to the riverbank. And there was a boulevard
along the bank, old willows, a cheerful spot. He ran down to the water,
people saw, clasped his hands, at the very place where the ferry docks,
maybe terrified of the water—and stood as if rooted to the spot. And it was
a wide place, the river swift, barges going past, on the other side there are
shops, a square, the church of God shines with its golden domes. And just
then the wife of Colonel Ferzing—an infantry regiment was stationed in
town—was hurrying to catch the ferry. Her daughter, also a little child of
about eight, walks along in a white dress, looks at the boy and laughs, and
she’s carrying a little country basket, and in the basket there’s a hedgehog.
“Look, mummy,” she says, “how the boy is looking at my hedgehog.”
“No,” says the colonel’s wife, “he’s frightened of something. What are you
so afraid of, pretty boy?” (So they told it afterwards.) “And what a pretty
boy he is, and how well he’s dressed; whose boy are you?” she says. And he
had never seen a hedgehog before, he came closer and looked, and he had
already forgotten—childhood! “What’s that you’ve got?” he says. “This,”
says the young miss, “is our hedgehog, we just bought it from a village
peasant, he found it in the forest.” “What’s a hedgehog like?” he says, and
he’s laughing now, and he begins poking his finger at it, and the hedgehog
bristles up, and the girl is glad of the boy. “We’re taking it home,” she says,
“we want to tame it.” “Ah,” he says, “give me your hedgehog!” And he
asked her so touchingly, and no sooner had he said it than Maxim Ivanovich
descended on him: “Ah! Here’s where you are! Take him!” (He was so
enraged that he had run out of the house without his hat to chase him.) The
boy, the moment he remembered everything, cried out, rushed to the water,
pressed his little fists to his breast, looked up at the sky (they saw it, they
saw it!) and—splash into the water! Well, people shouted, rushed from the
ferry, tried to pull him out, but the current was swift, it carried him away,

and when they pulled him out he was already dead—drowned. He had a
weak chest, he couldn’t endure the water, and how much does it take for
such a boy? And in people’s memories in those parts there had never yet
been such a small child to take his own life! Such a sin! And what can so
small a soul say to the Lord God in the other world!
This was what Maxim Ivanovich brooded over ever after. And the man
changed beyond recognition. He was sorely grieved then. He took to
drinking, drank a lot, but stopped—it didn’t help. He stopped going to the
factory as well, and paid no heed to anybody. They say something to him—
he keeps silent or waves his hand. He went about like that for a couple of
months, then began talking to himself. He goes about and talks to himself.
An outlying village, Vaskova, caught fire, nine houses burned down;
Maxim Ivanovich went to have a look. The burnt-out people surrounded
him, wailing—he promised to help and gave orders, then summoned his
steward and canceled it all: “No need to give them anything,” he said, and
didn’t say why. “The Lord gave me over to all people,” he says, “to trample
me down like some monster, so let it be so. Like the wind,” he says, “my
glory has been scattered.” The abbot himself called on him, a stern old man
who had introduced cenobitic order in the monastery.12 “What’s with you?”
he says, so sternly. “Here’s what,” and Maxim Ivanovich opened the book
for him and pointed to the place:
“But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he
were drowned in the depth of the sea” (Matthew 18:6).
“Yes,” said the abbot, “though it’s not said directly about that, still it
touches upon it. It’s bad if a man loses his measure—he’s a lost man. And
you’ve become conceited.”
Maxim Ivanovich sat as if dumbstruck. The abbot looked and looked.
“Listen,” he said, “and remember. It is said, ‘The words of a desperate
man fly on the wind.’ And also remember that even the angels of God are
not perfect, but the only perfect and sinless one is Jesus Christ our God,

whom the angels also serve. You didn’t want the death of that child, you
were merely unreasonable. Only,” he says, “here is what I even marvel at:
you’ve uttered so many worse outrages, you’ve sent so many people into
poverty, corrupted so many, ruined so many—isn’t it the same as if you’d
killed them? Hadn’t his sisters died even before then, all four little babies,
almost in front of your eyes? Why does this one disturb you so much? For I
suppose you’ve forgotten, not only to regret, but even to think about the
previous ones? Why are you so frightened of this child, before whom
you’re not even so guilty?”
“I see him in my dreams,” said Maxim Ivanovich.
“And what of it?”
But the man revealed no more, he sat and said nothing. The abbot
wondered, but with that he left; there was nothing more to be done here.
And Maxim Ivanovich sent for the tutor, for Pyotr Stepanovich; they
hadn’t seen each other since that occasion.
“Do you remember?” he says.
“I do,” he says.
“You’ve painted oil paintings for the tavern here,” he says, “and made a
copy of the bishop’s portrait. Can you paint a picture for me?”
“I can do everything,” he says. “I,” he says, “have all talents and can do
everything.”
“Then paint me a very big picture, over the whole wall, and first of all
paint the river on it, and the landing, and the ferry, and so that all the people
who were there will be in the picture. The colonel’s wife, and the little girl,
and that hedgehog. And paint me the whole other bank as well, so that it’s
seen as it was—the church, the square, the shops, and the cab stand—paint
it all as it was. And there by the ferry, paint the boy, just over the river, on
that very spot, and he must have his two fists pressed to his breast, to both

nipples. That without fail! And open up the sky before him on the other side
over the church, and have all the angels in the heavenly light come flying to
meet him. Can you satisfy me or not?”
“I can do everything.”
“I could invite the foremost painter from Moscow, or even from London
itself, instead of a bumpkin like you, only you remember his face. If it
comes out not like or a little like, I’ll only give you fifty roubles, but if it
comes out very much like, I’ll give you two hundred. Remember, blue eyes
. . . And the painting should be very, very big.”
They prepared everything; Pyotr Stepanovich started painting, then
suddenly he comes:
“No,” he says, “it’s impossible to paint it like that.”
“How so?”
“Because this sin, suicide, is the greatest of all sins. So how would angels
come to meet him after such a sin?”
“But he’s a child, he’s not responsible.”
“No, he’s not a child, but already a boy; he was eight years old when this
happened. He has to give at least some sort of answer.”
Maxim Ivanovich was still more terrified.
“But,” says Pyotr Stepanovich, “here’s what I’ve thought up: we won’t
open the sky or paint the angels; but I’ll bring a ray of light down from the
sky as if to meet him; one bright ray of light: it will be as if there’s
something all the same.”
So they brought down the ray of light. And I myself saw this painting
afterwards, much later, and that same ray, and the river stretched across the
whole wall, all blue; and the dear young boy right there, both hands pressed

to his breast, and the young miss, and the hedgehog—he did it all
satisfactorily. Only Maxim Ivanovich didn’t show the painting to anybody
then, but locked it up in his study, away from all eyes. And they really were
eager to have a look at it in town. He ordered everybody to be chased away.
There was a lot of talk. And Pyotr Stepanovich was as if out of his mind
then: “I can do everything now,” he says, “it’s proper for me to be at the
court in St. Petersburg.” He was a most amiable man, but he had an
inordinate love of extolling himself. And fate caught up with him: as soon
as he received all two hundred roubles, he immediately started drinking and
showing the money to everybody, boasting; and he was killed during the
night, drunk, by one of our tradesmen, whom he had been drinking with,
and robbed of his money. All this became known the next morning.
And it all ended in such a way that even now it’s the first thing they
remember. Suddenly Maxim Ivanovich turns up at that same widow’s: she
rented in a tradeswoman’s cottage at the edge of town. This time he went
into the yard, stood before her, and bowed to the ground. And since those
events the woman had been sick, could scarcely move. “Dear heart,” he
cried, “honest widow, marry me, monster that I am, let me live in the
world!” She looks at him, more dead than alive. “I want,” he says, “another
boy to be born to us, and if he gets born, it would mean that that boy has
forgiven us both, you and me. The boy told me to do it.” She can see the
man is not in his right mind, he’s as if in a frenzy, but still she can’t help
herself.
“That’s all trifles,” she said, “and nothing but faintheartedness. On
account of this faintheartedness, I lost all my little ones. I can’t even bear
the sight of you before me, still less take such an everlasting torment on
myself.”
Maxim Ivanovich drove off, but he didn’t calm down. The whole town
rumbled at such a wonder. And Maxim Ivanovich sent matchmakers. He
summoned two aunts of his from the provincial capital, tradeswomen.
Aunts or no aunts, they were relations, meaning it was honest; they started
persuading her, turning her head, wouldn’t leave the cottage. He sent
women from the towns-folk, from the merchants, sent the archpriest’s wife,

and some wives of officials; the whole town surrounded her, but she even
scorns them: “If,” she says, “my orphans could come back to life, but now
what? To take such a sin on myself before my little orphans?” He persuaded
the abbot, and he blew it into her ear: “You,” he says, “can call up a new
man in him.” She was horrified. And people are astonished at her: “How is
it even possible that she refuses such happiness!” And here’s what he tamed
her with: “After all,” he says, “he’s a suicide, and not as a child, but already
as a boy, and owing to his years, he couldn’t be admitted to holy
communion directly,13 and so he still has to give some sort of answer. If you
marry me, I’ll make you a great promise: I’ll build a new church only for
the eternal commemoration of his soul.” She couldn’t stand up against that,
and accepted him. So they were married.
And it turned out to everyone’s amazement. They began to live from the
first day in great and unfeigned harmony, carefully preserving their
marriage and like one soul in two bodies. She conceived that same winter,
and they started going around to the churches of God and trembling before
the wrath of the Lord. They visited three monasteries and heard prophecies.
He constructed the promised church and built a hospital and an almshouse
for the town. He allotted capital for widows and orphans. And he
remembered everyone he had injured, and wished to recompense them; he
started giving money away without stint, so that his spouse and the abbot
restrained his hands, for “this,” they said, “is already enough.” Maxim
Ivanovich obeyed: “I cheated Foma that time.” Well, so they paid Foma
back. And Foma even wept: “I,” he says, “I’m so . . . There’s so much I’m
content with even without that, and I’m eternally bounden to pray to God
for you.” So everyone was touched by it, and that means it’s true what they
say, that man will live by a good example. And they’re good people there.
His wife began to manage the factory herself, and in such a way that
people still remember it. He didn’t stop drinking, but she took care of him
on those days, and then also tried to cure him. His speech became decorous,
and his voice itself even changed. He became filled with boundless pity,
even for animals: from his window he saw a peasant beating his horse
outrageously on the head and at once sent to him and bought the horse for
twice the price. And he received the gift of tears:14 someone would start

talking to him, and he’d just dissolve in tears. When her time came, the
Lord finally heeded their prayers and sent them a son, and Maxim
Ivanovich brightened up for the first time since those events; he gave away
a lot of alms, forgave many debts, invited the whole town for the baptism.
He invited the town, but the next day he came out black as night. His wife
saw something had happened to him, she went up to him with the newborn.
“The boy,” she says, “has forgiven us, and heeded our tears and prayers for
him.” And it must be said that they hadn’t said a word about the matter for
that whole year, but had kept it to themselves. And Maxim Ivanovich
looked at her black as night. “Wait,” he says, “just consider, for the whole
year he hasn’t come, but last night I saw him in a dream again.” “Here, for
the first time, terror also entered my heart, after those strange words,” she
remembered later.
And it was not for nothing that he had dreamed of the boy. As soon as
Maxim Ivanovich mentioned it, almost, so to speak, that very minute,
something happened to the newborn: he suddenly fell ill. And the baby was
sick for eight days, they prayed tirelessly and invited doctors, and they sent
for the foremost doctor to come by train from Moscow. The doctor arrived
and was angry. “I,” he said, “am the foremost doctor, the whole of Moscow
is waiting for me.” He prescribed some drops and left hurriedly. Took eight
hundred roubles with him. And the baby died towards evening.
And what then? Maxim Ivanovich wrote a will leaving all his property to
his gentle wife, handed all the capital and papers over to her, completed
everything properly and in lawful order, then stood before her and bowed to
the ground. “Let me go, my priceless wife, to save my soul while it’s still
possible. If I spend my time without progress for my soul, I won’t come
back anymore. I was hard and cruel, and imposed heavy burdens, but I
imagine that the Lord will not leave me unrewarded for my future sorrows
and wanderings, for to leave it all is no small cross and no small sorrow.”
And his wife tried to soothe him with many tears: “You’re the only one I
have on earth now, who can I stay with? I,” she says, “have laid up mercy in
my heart during this year.” And all the town admonished him for the whole
month, and begged him, and decided to keep him by force. But he didn’t
listen to them, and left secretly at night, and never came back. And we hear

that he performs his deeds of wandering and patience even to this day, and
sends news to his dear wife every year . . .

Chapter Four
I
NOW I’M APPROACHING the final catastrophe, which concludes my
notes. But in order to continue further, I must first run ahead of myself and
explain something I had no idea of at the time of the action, but that I
learned of and fully explained to myself only much later, that is, when
everything was over. Otherwise I won’t be able to be clear, since I would
have to write in riddles. And therefore I will give a direct and simple
explanation, sacrificing so-called artistic quality, and I will do so as if it
were not I writing, without the participation of my heart, but as if in the
form of an entrefilet67 in the newspapers.
The thing was that my childhood friend Lambert may very well have
belonged, even directly, to those vile gangs of petty crooks who
communicate among themselves for the sake of what is now called
blackmail, and for which they now seek legal definitions and punishments
in the code of law. The gang Lambert was part of had begun in Moscow and
had already done enough mischief there (afterwards it was partly
uncovered). I heard later that in Moscow they had for a while an extremely
experienced and clever, and no longer young, leader. They embarked on
their ventures as a whole gang or in parts. Along with the most dirty and
unprintable things (of which, however, information did appear in the
newspapers), they also carried out rather complex and even clever ventures,
under the leadership of their chief. I learned about some of them later, but I
won’t go into the details. I will only mention that the main feature of their
method consisted in finding out certain secrets of people, sometimes very
honest and highly placed people; then they went to these persons and
threatened to reveal the documents (which they sometimes didn’t have at
all), and demanded a ransom to keep silent. There are things that are not
sinful and not at all criminal, the revealing of which might frighten even a
respectable and firm man. They mostly aimed at family secrets. To indicate

how deftly their chief sometimes acted, I will tell, with no details and in
only three lines, about one of their tricks. In a certain very honorable house
something in fact both sinful and criminal occurred: namely, the wife of a
well-known and respected man entered into a secret amorous liaison with a
young and rich officer. They got wind of it, and here is what they did: they
directly gave the young man to know that they were going to inform the
husband. They had not the slightest proof, and the young man knew that
perfectly well, and they themselves made no secret of it with him; but all
the deftness of the method and the cleverness of the calculation in this case
consisted merely in the consideration that the informed husband, even
without any proof, would act in the same way and take the same steps as if
he had received the most mathematical proof. They aimed here at a
knowledge of the man’s character and a knowledge of his family
circumstances. The main thing was that one member of the gang was a
young man from a very decent circle, who had managed to obtain the
preliminary information. They fleeced the lover for a very tidy sum, and
that without any danger to themselves, because the victim himself desired
secrecy.
Lambert, though he took part, did not belong entirely to that Moscow
gang; having acquired a taste for it, he gradually began, by way of trial, to
act on his own. I’ll say beforehand: he was not quite up to it. He was
calculating and by no means stupid, but he was hot-tempered and, what’s
more, simplehearted, or, better to say, naïve—that is, he had no knowledge
either of people or of society. For instance, he seemed not to understand at
all the significance of their Moscow chief and supposed it was very easy to
direct and organize such ventures. Finally, he assumed that almost everyone
was the same sort of scoundrel as himself. Or, for instance, once having
imagined that so-and-so was afraid or ought to be afraid for such-and-such
reason, he no longer doubted that the man was indeed afraid, as in an
axiom. I don’t know how to put it; later on I’ll explain it more clearly with
facts, but in my opinion he was rather crudely developed, and there were
certain good, noble feelings which he not only did not believe in, but maybe
even had no conception of.

He had come to Petersburg because he had long been thinking of it as a
vaster field than Moscow, and also because in Moscow he had gotten into a
scrape somewhere and somehow, and somebody was looking for him with
the most ill intentions in his regard. On coming to Petersburg, he
immediately contacted a former comrade, but he found the field scant, the
affairs petty. His acquaintance later widened, but nothing came of it.
“People here are trashy, nothing but kids,” he himself said to me later. And
then, one bright morning, at dawn, he suddenly found me freezing under the
wall and fell directly onto the trail of the “richest,” in his opinion, of
“affairs.”
The whole affair rested on what I had babbled as I thawed out in his
apartment then. Oh, I was nearly delirious then! But still it came out clearly
from my words that, of all my offenses on that fateful day, the one I
remembered most and took closest to heart was the offense from Bjoring
and from her: otherwise I wouldn’t have raved about that alone at
Lambert’s, but would also have raved, for example, about Zershchikov; yet
it turned out to be only the first, as I learned afterwards from Lambert
himself. And besides, I was in ecstasy and looked upon Lambert and
Alphonsine that terrible morning as some sort of liberators and saviors.
Later, while recovering, I tried to figure out as I lay in bed what Lambert
might have learned from my babble and precisely to what degree I had
babbled—but I never once even suspected that he could have learned so
much then! Oh, of course, judging by my pangs of conscience, I already
suspected even then that I must have told a lot that was unnecessary, but, I
repeat, I could never have supposed it was to such a degree! I also hoped
and counted on the fact that I had been unable to articulate clearly at his
place then, I had a firm memory of that, and yet it turned out in fact that I
had articulated much more clearly than I supposed and hoped afterwards.
But the main thing was that it was all revealed only later and long after, and
that’s where my trouble lay.
From my raving, babbling, prattling, raptures, and so on, he had learned,
first, almost all the family names accurately, and even some addresses.
Second, he had formed a rather approximate notion of the significance of
these persons (the old prince, her, Bjoring, Anna Andreevna, and even

Versilov); third, he had learned that I had been offended and was
threatening revenge; and finally, fourth and most important, he had learned
that this document existed, mysterious and hidden, this letter which, if
shown to the half-mad old prince, he, having read it and learned that his
own daughter considered him mad and had already “consulted lawyers”
about how to lock him up, would either lose his mind definitively or drive
her out of the house and disinherit her, or marry a certain Mlle. Versilov,
whom he already wanted to marry but had not been allowed to. In short,
Lambert understood a great deal; without doubt terribly much remained
obscure, but still the blackmailing artificer had fallen onto a sure trail.
When I fled from Alphonsine then, he immediately found my address (by
the simplest means: through the information bureau), then immediately
made the proper inquiries, from which he learned that all these persons I
had babbled about actually existed. Then he proceeded directly to the first
step.
The main thing was that there existed a document, and it was in my
possession, and this document was of great value; of that Lambert had no
doubt. Here I will omit one circumstance, which it would be better to speak
of later and in its place, but I will just mention that this circumstance was
what most chiefly confirmed Lambert in his conviction of the real existence
and, above all, the value of the document. (A fateful circumstance, I say it
beforehand, which I could never have imagined, not only then, but even till
the very end of the whole story, when everything suddenly began to
collapse and got explained by itself.) And so, convinced of the chief thing,
as a first step he went to see Anna Andreevna.
And yet for me there’s a puzzle to this day: how could he, Lambert,
infiltrate and stick himself to such an unapproachable and lofty person as
Anna Andreevna? True, he made inquiries, but what of it? True, he was
excellently dressed, spoke Parisian French, and was the bearer of a French
name, but how could it be that Anna Andreevna did not discern the
swindler in him at once? Or we may suppose that a swindler was just what
she needed then. But can it be so?

I was never able to find out the circumstances of their meeting, but later I
imagined the scene many times. Most likely Lambert, from the first word
and gesture, had played my childhood friend before her, trembling for his
beloved and dear comrade. But, of course, in that first meeting he managed
to hint very clearly that I also had a “document,” to let her know that this
was a secret, and that only he, Lambert, was in possession of this secret,
and that with this document I was going to take revenge on Mme.
Akhmakov, and so on, and so forth. Above all, he could explain to her, as
pointedly as possible, the significance and value of this paper. As for Anna
Andreevna, she was precisely in such a position that she could not help
snatching at the news of something like that, could not help listening with
extreme attention, and . . . could not help getting caught on the bait—“out
of the struggle for existence.” Just at that time, she had precisely had her
fiancé canceled and taken under tutelage to Tsarskoe, and she herself had
been taken under tutelage as well. And suddenly such a find: here it was no
longer old wives whispering in each other’s ears, or tearful complaints, or
calumny and gossip, here was a letter, a manuscript, that is, a mathematical
proof of the perfidy of his daughter’s intentions, and of all those who had
taken him from her, and that, therefore, he had to save himself at least by
fleeing again to her, the same Anna Andreevna, and marrying her even
within twenty-four hours; otherwise they would up and confiscate him to a
madhouse.
But it also may be that Lambert used no cunning with the girl at all, not
even for a moment, but just blurted out with the first word: “Mademoiselle,
either remain an old maid, or become a princess and a millionaire: there is
this document, I’ll steal it from the adolescent and hand it over to you . . .
on a promissory note from you for thirty thousand.” I even think that’s
precisely how it was. Oh, he considered everyone the same sort of
scoundrel as himself. I repeat, there was in him a sort of scoundrel’s
simpleheartedness, a scoundrel’s innocence . . . Be that as it may, it’s quite
possible that Anna Andreevna, even in the face of such an assault, was not
thrown off for a minute, but was perfectly able to control herself and hear
out the blackmailer, who spoke in his own style—and all that out of
“breadth.” Well, naturally, at first she blushed a little, but then she got hold
of herself and heard him out. And when I picture that unapproachable,

proud, truly dignified girl, and with such a mind, hand in hand with
Lambert, then . . . a mind, yes! A Russian mind, of such dimensions, a lover
of breadth; and moreover a woman’s, and moreover in such circumstances!
Now I’ll make a résumé. By the day and hour of my going out after my
illness, Lambert stood on the two following points (this I now know for
certain): first, to take a promissory note from Anna Andreevna for no less
than thirty thousand in exchange for the document; and then to help her
frighten the prince, abduct him, and suddenly get him married to her—in
short, something like that. Here a whole plan had even been formed; they
were only waiting for my help, that is, for the document itself.
The second plan: to betray Anna Andreevna, abandon her, and sell the
paper to Mme. Akhmakov, if it proved more profitable. Here account was
also taken of Bjoring. But Lambert had not yet gone to Mme. Akhmakov,
but had only tracked her down. Also waiting for me.
Oh, he did need me, that is, not me but the document! Concerning me, he
had also formed two plans. The first consisted in acting in concert with me,
if it really was impossible otherwise, and going halves with me, after first
subjecting me morally and physically. But the second plan was much more
to his liking; it consisted in hoodwinking me like a little boy and stealing
the document from me, or even simply taking it from me by force. He loved
this plan and cherished it in his dreams. I repeat: there was one
circumstance owing to which he had almost no doubt of the success of the
second plan, but, as I’ve already said, I will explain it later. In any case, he
was waiting for me with convulsive impatience: everything depended on
me, all the steps and what to decide on.
And I must do him justice: for a while he controlled himself, despite his
hot temper. He didn’t come to my house during my illness—he came only
once and saw Versilov; he didn’t disturb or frighten me, he preserved an air
of the most total detachment before me, up to the day and hour of my going
out. With regard to the fact that I might give away, or tell about, or destroy
the document, he was at ease. From what I had said at his place, he was able
to conclude how much I myself valued secrecy and how afraid I was that

someone might learn of the document. And that I would go to him first, and
to no one else, on the first day of my recovery, he did not doubt in the least:
Nastasya Egorovna came to see me partly on his orders, and he knew that
my curiosity and fear were already aroused, that I wouldn’t be able to stand
it . . . And besides, he took every measure, might even know the day of my
going out, so that there was no way I could turn my back on him, even if I
wanted to.
But if Lambert was waiting for me, then maybe Anna Andreevna was
waiting for me still more. I’ll say directly: Lambert might have been partly
right in preparing to betray her, and the fault was hers. In spite of their
undoubted agreement (in what form I don’t know, but I have no doubt of it),
Anna Andreevna down to the very last minute was not fully candid with
him. She didn’t open herself all the way. She hinted to him about all
agreements and all promises on her part—but only hinted; she listened,
maybe, to his whole plan in detail, but gave only silent approval. I have
firm grounds for concluding so, and the reason was that she was waiting for
me. She liked better to have dealings with me than with the scoundrel
Lambert—that was an unquestionable fact for me! I understand that; but her
mistake was that Lambert finally understood it as well. And it would have
been too disadvantageous for him if she, bypassing him, wheedled the
document out of me, and we entered into an agreement. Besides, at that
time he was already certain of the solidity of the “affair.” Another in his
place would have been afraid and would still have had doubts; but Lambert
was young, bold, with a most impatient desire for gain, had little knowledge
of people, and undoubtedly regarded them all as base; such a man could
have no doubts, especially as he had already elicited all the main
confirmations from Anna Andreevna.
A last and most important little word: did Versilov know anything by that
day and had he already participated then in some, however remote, plans
with Lambert? No, no, no, not yet then, though perhaps a fateful little word
had been dropped . . . But enough, enough, I’m running too far ahead.
Well, and what about me? Did I know anything, and what did I know by
the day I went out? At the beginning of this entrefilet I announced that I

knew nothing by the day I went out, that I learned about it all much later
and even at a time when everything was already accomplished. That’s true,
but is it fully? No, it’s not; I undoubtedly already knew something, knew
even all too much, but how? Let the reader remember the dream! If there
could be such a dream, if it could burst from my heart and formulate itself
that way, it meant that I—didn’t know, but anticipated—an awful lot of
those things I have just explained and actually learned only “when
everything was already over.” There was no knowledge, but my heart
throbbed with anticipations, and evil spirits already possessed my dreams.
And this was the man I was eager to see, knowing full well what sort of
man he was and even anticipating the details! And why was I eager to see
him? Imagine: now, in this very moment as I write, it seems to me that I
knew in all its details why I was eager to see him, whereas at the time,
again, I still knew nothing. Maybe the reader will understand that. But now
—to business, fact by fact.

II
IT BEGAN, STILL two days before my going out, with Liza coming home
in the evening all in alarm. She was awfully insulted; and indeed something
insufferable had happened to her.
I’ve already mentioned her relations with Vasin. She went to him not
only to show us that she didn’t need us, but also because she really
appreciated Vasin. Their acquaintance had already begun in Luga, and it
had always seemed to me that Vasin was not indifferent to her. In the
misfortune that struck her, it was natural that she might wish for advice
from a firm, calm, always elevated mind, which she supposed Vasin to
have. Besides, women are not great masters at evaluating the male mind, if
they like the man, and they gladly take paradoxes for strict deductions, if
they agree with their own wishes. What Liza liked in Vasin was his
sympathy with her position, and, as it had seemed to her from the first, his
sympathy for the prince as well. Besides, suspecting his feelings towards
her, she could not help appreciating his sympathy for his rival. The prince,
whom she herself had told that she sometimes went to Vasin for advice, had
taken this news with extreme uneasiness from the very first; he had begun

to be jealous. This had offended her, so that she had deliberately continued
her relations with Vasin. The prince said nothing, but was gloomy. Liza
herself confessed to me (very long afterwards) that she had very soon
stopped liking Vasin; he was calm, and precisely this eternal, smooth calm,
which she had liked so much in the beginning, later seemed rather unsightly
to her. It seemed he was practical, and, indeed, several times he gave her
advice that appeared good, but all this advice, as if on purpose, turned out to
be unfeasible. He sometimes judged too haughtily and without the least
embarrassment before her—becoming less embarrassed as time went on,
which she ascribed to his growing and involuntary contempt for her
position. Once she thanked him for being constantly good-natured with me
and for talking with me as with an equal, though he was so superior to me
in intelligence (that is, she conveyed my own words to him). He replied:
“That’s not so, and it’s not for that. It’s because I don’t see any difference
in him from the others. I don’t consider him either stupider than the smart
ones or wickeder than the good ones. I’m the same with everybody, because
in my eyes everybody’s the same.”
“You mean you really can’t see any differences?”
“Oh, of course, they’re all different from each other in some way, but in
my eyes the differences don’t exist, because the differences between people
are of no concern to me; for me they’re all the same and it’s all the same,
and so I’m equally nice to everybody.”
“And you don’t find it boring?”
“No, I’m always content with myself.”
“And you don’t desire anything?”
“Of course I do, but not very much. I need almost nothing, not a rouble
more. Myself in golden clothes and myself as I am—it’s all the same;
golden clothes will add nothing to Vasin. Morsels don’t tempt me: can
positions or honors be worth the place I’m worth?”

Liza assured me on her honor that he once uttered this literally. However,
it’s impossible to judge like that here; one must know the circumstances
under which it was uttered.
Liza gradually came to the conclusion that his attitude towards the prince
was indulgent maybe only because everybody was the same to him and
“differences did not exist,” and not at all out of sympathy for her. But in the
end he began somehow visibly to lose his indifference, and his attitude
towards the prince changed to one not only of condemnation, but also of
scornful irony. This made Liza angry, but Vasin wouldn’t let up. Above all,
he always expressed himself so softly, he even condemned without
indignation, but simply made logical deductions about her hero’s total
nonentity; but in this logic lay the irony. Finally he deduced for her almost
directly all the “unreasonableness” of her love, all the stubborn forcedness
of this love. “You erred in your feelings, and errors, once recognized, ought
unfailingly to be corrected.”
This was just on that very day. Liza got up indignantly in order to leave,
but what did this reasonable man do and how did he end? With a most
noble air and even with feeling, he offered her his hand. Liza at once called
him a fool to his face and left.
To suggest betraying an unfortunate man because this unfortunate man
was “not worthy” of her and, above all, to suggest it to a woman who was
pregnant by this unfortunate man—there’s the mind of these people! I call
that being awfully theoretical and completely ignorant of life, which comes
from a boundless self-love. And on top of all that, Liza discerned in the
clearest way that he was even proud of his act, if only because, for example,
he already knew about her pregnancy. With tears of indignation she hurried
to the prince, and he—he even outdid Vasin: it would seem he might have
been convinced after she told him that there was no point in being jealous
now; but it was here that he went out of his mind. However, jealous people
are all like that! He made an awful scene and insulted her so much that she
decided to break all relations with him at once.

She came home, however, still keeping hold of herself, but she couldn’t
help telling mama. Oh, that evening they became close again, absolutely as
before: the ice was broken; they both naturally wept their fill, embracing
each other as they used to do, and Liza apparently calmed down, though she
was very gloomy. She sat that evening with Makar Ivanovich, not saying a
word, but not leaving the room either. She listened very hard to what he was
saying. Since the occasion with the little bench, she had become extremely
and somehow timidly respectful towards him, though she still remained
taciturn.
But this time, Makar Ivanovich somehow gave the conversation an
unexpected and astonishing turn. I’ll note that in the morning Versilov and
the doctor had spoken very frowningly of his health. I’ll also note that for
several days preparations had been under way in our house for the
celebration of mama’s birthday, which was to take place in five days, and
we often spoke of it. Apropos of that day, Makar Ivanovich for some reason
suddenly embarked on reminiscences and recalled mama’s childhood and
the time when she still “couldn’t stand on her little legs.” “She never left
my arms,” the old man recalled. “I used to teach her to walk, I’d put her in
the corner three steps away and call her, and she comes swaying to me
across the room, and she’s not afraid, she laughs, and when she reaches me,
she throws her arms around my neck and embraces me. I also told you fairy
tales, Sofya Andreevna; you were a great lover of fairy tales; for two hours
you’d sit on my knee listening. They marveled in the cottage: ‘See how
attached she is to Makar.’ Or else I’d take you to the forest, find a raspberry
bush, sit you down there, and start cutting wooden whistles for you. We’d
have a good walk, and I’d carry you back in my arms—the baby’s asleep.
And once you got frightened by a wolf, ran to me all trembling, and there
wasn’t any wolf.”
“That I remember,” said mama.
“Do you really?”
“I remember a lot. From as early as I can remember myself in life, ever
since then I’ve seen your love and mercy over me,” she said in a heartfelt

voice and suddenly blushed all over.
Makar Ivanovich paused briefly.
“Forgive me, little children, I’m going. Now the term of my life is upon
me. In my old age I have found comfort from all sorrows. Thank you, my
dears.”
“Come now, Makar Ivanovich, dear heart,” Versilov exclaimed,
somewhat alarmed, “the doctor told me today that you were incomparably
better . . .”
Mama was listening fearfully.
“Well, what does he know, your Alexander Semyonych?” Makar
Ivanovich smiled. “He’s a dear man, but no more than that. Come, friends,
do you think I’m afraid to die? Today, after my morning prayer, I had the
feeling in my heart that I wouldn’t leave here anymore; it was told me.
Well, and what of it, blessed be the name of the Lord; only I’d like to have a
good look at you all again. The much-suffering Job, too, was comforted,
looking at his new children, but that he forgot the former ones, and that he
could have forgotten them—is impossible!15 Only over the years sorrow
seems to mingle with joy and turn into a bright sighing. That’s how it is in
the world: every soul is both tested and comforted. I’ve decided, little
children, to tell you a word or two, not much,” he went on with a gentle,
beautiful smile, which I will never forget, and suddenly turned to me: “You,
my dear, be zealous for the holy Church, and if the time calls for it, also die
for her; but wait, don’t be frightened, not now,” he smiled. “Now maybe
you’re not thinking of it, but later maybe you will. Only there’s this as well:
whatever good you intend to do, do it for God, and not for the sake of envy.
Hold firmly to what you do, and don’t give up out of any sort of
faintheartedness; and do it gradually, without rushing or throwing yourself
about; well, that’s all you need, save maybe also getting used to praying
every day and steadfastly. I say it just so, in case you remember it one day. I
was going to say something to you, too, Andrei Petrovich, sir, but God will
find your heart even without me. And it’s long ago now that you and I

stopped talking of such things, ever since that arrow pierced my heart. And
now, as I’m going, I’ll just remind you . . . of what you promised then . . .”
He almost whispered the last words, looking down.
“Makar Ivanovich!” Versilov said in embarrassment, and got up from his
chair.
“Well, well, don’t be embarrassed, sir, I’m only reminding you . . . It’s I
who am guiltiest of all before God in this matter; for, though you were my
master, I still shouldn’t have condoned this weakness. So you, too, Sofya,
don’t trouble your soul too much, for your whole sin is mine, and in you, as
I think, there was hardly any understanding then, and perhaps in you also,
sir, along with her,” he smiled, his lips trembling with some sort of pain,
“and though I might have taught you then, my spouse, even with a rod, and
so I should have, I pitied you as you fell down before me in tears and
concealed nothing . . . and kissed my feet. I recall that, my beloved, not as a
reproach to you, but only as a reminder to Andrei Petrovich . . . for you
yourself, sir, remember your nobleman’s promise, and marriage covers
everything . . . I’m saying it in front of the children, sir, my dear heart.”
He was extremely agitated, and looked at Versilov as if expecting words
of confirmation from him. I repeat, all this was so unexpected that I sat
motionless. Versilov was even no less agitated than he was: he silently went
over to mama and embraced her tightly; then mama, also silently, went up
to Makar Ivanovich and bowed down at his feet.
In short, the scene turned out to be stupendous; this time there was only
our family in the room, not even Tatyana Pavlovna was there. Liza
somehow straightened up in her place and listened silently; suddenly she
rose and said firmly to Makar Ivanovich:
“Bless me, too, Makar Ivanovich, for a great torment. Tomorrow my
whole fate will be decided . . . and so pray for me today.”
And she left the room. I know that Makar Ivanovich already knew
everything about her from mama. But that evening for the first time I saw

Versilov and mama together; till then I had just seen his slave beside him.
There was an awful lot that I didn’t know or hadn’t noticed yet in this man,
whom I had already condemned, and therefore I went back to my room in
confusion. And it must be said that precisely by that time all my
perplexities about him had thickened; never yet had he seemed so
mysterious and unfathomable as precisely at that time; but that’s just what
the whole story I’m writing is about. All in good time.
“However,” I thought to myself then, as I was going to bed, “it turns out
that he gave his ‘nobleman’s word’ to marry mama in case she was left a
widow. He said nothing about it when he told me earlier about Makar
Ivanovich.”
The next day Liza was gone the whole day, and coming back quite late,
she went straight to Makar Ivanovich. At first I didn’t want to go in, so as
not to bother them, but I soon noticed that mama and Versilov were already
there, and I went in. Liza was sitting next to the old man and weeping on
his shoulder, and he, with a sad face, was silently stroking her head.
Versilov explained to me (later in my room) that the prince insisted on
having his way and proposed to marry Liza at the first opportunity, before
the decision of the court. It was hard for Liza to decide on it, though she
now almost had no right not to. Besides, Makar Ivanovich had “ordered”
her to marry. Of course, all this would have come out right later by itself,
and she would undoubtedly have married on her own, without any orders
and hesitations, but at the present moment she was so insulted by the one
she loved, and so humiliated by this love even in her own eyes, that it was
hard for her to decide. But, besides the insult, there was a new circumstance
mixed into it, which I couldn’t have begun to suspect.
“Have you heard that all those young people from the Petersburg side
were arrested last night?” Versilov added suddenly.
“What? Dergachev?” I cried.
“Yes, and Vasin also.”

I was struck, especially on hearing about Vasin.
“But is he mixed up with anything? My God, what will happen to them
now? And, as if on purpose, at the very time when Liza was accusing Vasin
so! . . . What do you think may happen to them? It’s Stebelkov! I swear to
you, it’s Stebelkov!”
“Let’s drop it,” said Versilov, looking at me strangely (precisely as one
looks at an uncomprehending and unsuspecting man). “Who knows what
they’ve got there, and who knows what will happen to them? There’s
something else: I hear you want to go out tomorrow. Won’t you be going to
Prince Sergei Petrovich?”
“First thing—though, I confess, it’s very hard for me. Why, do you have
some message for him?”
“No, nothing. I’ll see him myself. I’m sorry for Liza. And what advice
can Makar Ivanovich give her? He himself understands nothing in people or
in life. There’s another thing, my dear” (he hadn’t called me “my dear” for a
long time), “there are also . . . certain young men here . . . one of whom is
your former schoolmate, Lambert . . . It seems to me they’re all great
scoundrels . . . I say it just to warn you . . . Anyhow, of course, all that is
your business, I understand that I have no right . . .”
“Andrei Petrovich,” I seized his hand without thinking and almost in
inspiration, as often happened with me (we were almost in the dark),
“Andrei Petrovich, I’ve been silent—you’ve seen that, I’ve kept silent up to
now, and do you know why? To avoid your secrets. I’ve simply resolved
never to know them. I’m a coward, I’m afraid that your secrets will tear you
out of my heart completely, and I don’t want that. And if so, then why
should you know my secrets? Let it be all the same to you, wherever I may
go! Isn’t it so?”
“You’re right, but not a word more, I beg you!” he said, and left my
room. Thus we accidentally had a bit of a talk. But he only added to my
agitation before my new step in life the next day, so that I spent the whole
night constantly waking up. But I felt good.

III
THE NEXT DAY, though I left the house at ten o’clock in the morning, I
tried as hard as I could to leave on the quiet, without saying good-bye or
telling anybody—to slip away, as they say. Why I did that I don’t know, but
if even mama had seen me going out and started talking to me, I would
have answered with something angry. When I found myself outside and
breathed the cold outdoor air, I shuddered from a very strong sensation—
almost an animal one, and which I’d call carnivorous. Why was I going,
where was I going? It was completely indefinite and at the same time
carnivorous . I felt frightened and joyful—both at once.
“And will I dirty myself today, or not?” I thought dashingly to myself,
though I knew all too well that today’s step, once taken, would be decisive
and irreparable for my whole life. But there’s no use speaking in riddles.
I went straight to the prince’s prison. For three days already I had had a
note from Tatyana Pavlovna to the warden, and he gave me an excellent
reception. I don’t know whether he’s a good man, and I don’t think it
matters; but he allowed me to meet with the prince and arranged it in his
own room, kindly yielding it to us. The room was like any room—an
ordinary room in the government apartment of an official of a known sort—
that also, I think, we can omit describing. So the prince and I were left
alone.
He came out to me in some half-military housecoat, but with a very clean
shirt, a fancy necktie, washed and combed, and along with that terribly thin
and yellow. I noticed this yellowness even in his eyes. In short, his looks
were so changed that I even stopped in perplexity.
“How changed you are!” I cried.
“Never mind! Sit down, my dear,” he half-foppishly showed me to an
armchair and sat down facing me. “Let’s go on to the main thing: you see,
my dear Alexei Makarovich . . .”
“Arkady,” I corrected.

“What? Ah, yes—well, well, it makes no difference. Ah, yes!” he
suddenly realized, “excuse me, dear heart, let’s go on to the main thing . . .”
In short, he was in a terrible hurry to go on to something. He was all
pervaded with something, from head to foot, with some sort of main idea,
which he wished to formulate and present to me. He talked terribly much
and quickly, with strain and suffering, explaining and gesticulating, but in
the first moments I understood decidedly nothing.
“To put it briefly” (he had already used the phrase “to put it briefly” ten
times before then), “to put it briefly,” he concluded, “if I have troubled you,
Arkady Makarovich, and summoned you so insistently yesterday through
Liza, then, though things are ablaze, still, since the essence of the decision
should be extraordinary and definitive, we . . .”
“Excuse me, Prince,” I interrupted, “did you summon me yesterday? Liza
told me precisely nothing.”
“What!” he cried, suddenly stopping in great bewilderment, even almost
in fright.
“She told me precisely nothing. Last night she came home so upset that
she didn’t even manage to say a word to me.”
The prince jumped up from his chair.
“Can this be true, Arkady Makarovich? In that case, it’s . . . it’s...”
“But, anyhow, what of it? Why are you so disturbed? She simply forgot
or something . . .”
He sat down, but it was as if stupefaction came over him. The news that
Liza hadn’t told me anything simply crushed him. He suddenly began
speaking quickly and waving his arms, but again it was terribly difficult to
understand.

“Wait!” he said suddenly, falling silent and holding up his finger. “Wait,
it’s . . . it’s . . . unless I’m mistaken . . . these are—tricks, sir! . . .” he
murmured with a maniac’s smile. “And it means that . . .”
“It means precisely nothing!” I interrupted. “And I only don’t understand
why such an empty circumstance torments you so . . . Ah, Prince, since that
time, ever since that night—remember . . .”
“Since what night, and what of it?” he cried fussily, obviously vexed that
I had interrupted him.
“At Zershchikov’s, where we saw each other for the last time—well,
before your letter? You were also terribly disturbed then, but between then
and now there’s such a difference that I’m even horrified at you . . . Or
don’t you remember?”
“Ah, yes,” he said, in the voice of a worldly man, and as if suddenly
recalling, “ah, yes! That evening . . . I heard . . . Well, how is your health,
and how are you now after all this, Arkady Makarovich? . . . But, anyway,
let’s go on to the main thing. You see, I am essentially pursuing three goals;
there are three tasks before me, and I . . .”
He quickly began speaking again about his “main thing.” I realized,
finally, that I saw before me a man who ought at least to have a napkin with
vinegar put to his head at once, if not to have his blood let. His whole
incoherent conversation, naturally, turned around his trial, around the
possible outcome; also around the fact that the regimental commander
himself had visited him and spent a long time talking him out of something,
but that he had not obeyed; around a note he had just written and submitted
somewhere; around the prosecutor; about the fact that he would probably be
stripped of his rights and exiled somewhere to the northern reaches of
Russia; about the possibility of becoming a colonist and earning back his
rights in Tashkent;16 that he would teach his son (the future one, from Liza)
this, and pass on that, “in the back-woods, in Arkhangelsk, in
Kholmogory.”17 “If I wished for your opinion, Arkady Makarovich, then
believe me, I value so much the feeling . . . If you only knew, if you only

knew, Arkady Makarovich, my dear, my brother, what Liza means to me,
what she has meant to me here, now, all this time!” he cried suddenly,
clutching his head with both hands.
“Sergei Petrovich, can it be that you’ll ruin her and take her away? To
Kholmogory!” suddenly burst from me irrepressibly. Liza’s lot with this
maniac all her life suddenly presented itself to my consciousness clearly
and as if for the first time. He looked at me, stood up again, took a step,
turned around, and sat down again, still holding his head with his hands.
“I keep dreaming of spiders!” he said suddenly.
“You’re terribly agitated, Prince, I’d advise you to lie down and send for
the doctor at once.”
“No, excuse me, that can wait. I mainly asked you to come so that I could
explain to you about the marriage. The marriage, you know, will take place
right here in the church, I’ve already said so. Approval has been granted,
and they even encourage . . . As for Liza . . .”
“Prince, have mercy on Liza, my dear,” I cried, “don’t torment her now at
least, don’t be jealous!”
“What!” he cried, looking at me point-blank, his eyes almost popping
out, and his face twisted into some sort of long, senselessly questioning
smile. It was clear that the words “don’t be jealous” for some reason struck
him terribly.
“Forgive me, Prince, it was inadvertent. Oh, Prince, I’ve come to know
an old man recently, my nominal father . . . Oh, if you could see him you’d
be calmer . . . Liza also appreciates him so.”
“Ah, yes, Liza . . . ah, yes, it’s your father? Or . . . pardon, mon cher,68
something like that . . . I remember . . . she told me . . . a little old man . . .
To be sure, to be sure. I also knew a little old man . . . Mais passons,69 the
main thing, in order to clarify the whole essence of the moment, we must . .
.”

I got up to leave. It was painful for me to look at him.
“I do not understand!” he uttered sternly and imposingly, seeing that I
had gotten up to leave.
“It’s painful for me to look at you,” I said.
“Arkady Makarovich, one word, one word more!” He suddenly seized
me by the shoulders with a completely different look and gesture, and sat
me down in the armchair. “Have you heard about those . . . you
understand?” he leaned towards me.
“Ah, yes, Dergachev. It must be Stebelkov!” I cried, unable to restrain
myself.
“Yes, Stebelkov and . . . you don’t know?”
He stopped short and again stared at me with the same popping eyes and
the same long, convulsive, senselessly questioning smile, which spread
wider and wider. His face gradually grew pale. It was as if something
suddenly shook me: I remembered Versilov’s look the day before, when he
was telling me about Vasin’s arrest.
“Oh, can it be?” I cried fearfully.
“You see, Arkady Makarovich, this is why I summoned you, in order to
explain . . . I wanted . . .” he was whispering quickly.
“It was you who denounced Vasin!” I cried.
“No, you see, there was this manuscript. Before the very last day, Vasin
gave it to Liza . . . for safekeeping. And she left it here for me to look at,
and then it so happened that they quarreled the next day . . .”
“You turned the manuscript over to the authorities!”
“Arkady Makarovich! Arkady Makarovich!”

“And so you,” I cried, jumping up and rapping out the words, “you, with
no other motive, with no other purpose, but solely because the unfortunate
Vasin is your rival, solely out of jealousy, you gave the manuscript
entrusted to Liza . . . gave it to whom? To whom? To the prosecutor?”
But he didn’t have time to answer, and he hardly would have answered
anything, because he stood before me like an idol, still with the same
morbid smile and fixed gaze; but suddenly the door opened and Liza came
in. She almost fainted, seeing us together.
“You here? So you are here?” she cried with a suddenly distorted face
and seizing me by the hands. “So you . . . know?”
But she had already read in my face that I “knew.” I quickly and
irrepressibly embraced her, tightly, tightly! And only at that moment did I
grasp for the first time, in its full force, what hopeless, endless grief, with
no dawn, lay forever over the whole destiny of this . . . voluntary seeker of
suffering!
“But is it possible to speak with him now?” she suddenly tore herself
away from me. “Is it possible to be with him? Why are you here? Look at
him! Look! And is it possible, is it possible to judge him?”
Endless misery and commiseration were in her face as she exclaimed
this, pointing to the unfortunate man. He was sitting in the armchair,
covering his face with his hands. And she was right: this was a man in high
delirium and irresponsible; and maybe for three days now he had already
been irresponsible. That same morning he had been put in the hospital, and
by evening he had come down with brain fever.

IV
FROM THE PRINCE, whom I left then with Liza, I went at around one
o’clock to my former apartment. I forgot to mention that it was a damp, dull
day, with the beginnings of a thaw and with a warm wind, capable of
upsetting even an elephant’s nerves. The landlord met me rejoicing,

hustling and bustling, something I terribly dislike precisely at such
moments. I treated him drily and went straight to my room, but he followed
me, and though he didn’t dare ask any questions, curiosity simply shone in
his eyes, and at the same time he looked as if he even had some right to be
curious. I had to treat him politely for my own good; but though it was all
too necessary for me to find out a thing or two (and I knew I would), still I
was loath to start asking questions. I inquired after his wife’s health, and we
went to see her. She met me courteously, though with an extremely
businesslike and taciturn air; this reconciled me a little. Briefly, this time I
learned some quite wondrous things.
Well, naturally, Lambert had been there, but then he had come twice
more and “looked the rooms all over,” saying he might rent them. Nastasya
Egorovna had come several times, God alone knew why. “She was also
very curious,” the landlord added, but I didn’t gratify him, I didn’t ask what
she was curious about. In general, I didn’t ask any questions, it was he who
spoke, and I pretended to be rummaging in my suitcase (in which there was
almost nothing left). But the most vexing thing was that he also decided to
play mysterious and, noticing that I refrained from asking questions, also
thought it his duty to become more clipped, almost enigmatic.
“The young lady was also here,” he added, looking at me strangely.
“What young lady?”
“Anna Andreevna. She came twice; got acquainted with my wife. Very
nice person, very agreeable. Such an acquaintance one can appreciate only
too well, Arkady Makarovich . . .” And, having brought that out, he even
took a step towards me: so much did he want me to understand something.
“Twice, really?” I was surprised.
“The second time she came with her brother.”
“Meaning with Lambert,” occurred to me involuntarily.

“No, sir, not with Mr. Lambert,” he guessed at once, as if jumping into
my soul with his eyes, “but with her brother, the real one, the young Mr.
Versilov. A kammerjunker,18 it seems?”
I was very embarrassed; he looked on, smiling terribly affectionately.
“Ah, there was someone else here asking for you—that mamzelle, the
Frenchwoman, Mamzelle Alphonsine de Verdaigne. Ah, how well she
sings, and she also declaims beautifully in verse! She was on her way in
secret to see Prince Nikolai Ivanovich then, in Tsarskoe, to sell him a little
dog, she said, a rarity, black, no bigger than your fist . . .”
I begged him to leave me alone, excusing myself with a headache. He
instantly satisfied me, not even finishing the phrase, and not only without
the least touchiness, but almost with pleasure, waving his hand
mysteriously and as if saying, “I understand, sir, I understand,” and though
he didn’t say it, instead he left the room on tiptoe, he gave himself that
pleasure. There are very vexatious people in this world.
I sat alone, thinking things over for about an hour and a half—not
thinking things over, however, but just brooding. Though I was confused, I
was not in the least surprised. I even expected something more, some still
greater wonders. “Maybe they’ve already performed them by now,” I
thought. I had been firmly and long convinced, still at home, that their
machine was wound up and running at full speed. “It’s only me they lack,
that’s what,” I thought again, with a sort of irritable and agreeable
smugness. That they were waiting for me with all their might—and setting
something up to happen in my apartment—was clear as day. “Can it be the
old prince’s wedding? The beaters are all after him. Only will I allow it,
gentlemen, that’s the thing,” I concluded again with haughty satisfaction.
“Once I start, I’ll immediately get drawn into the whirlpool again, like a
chip of wood. Am I free now, this minute, or am I no longer free? Going
back to mama tonight, can I still say to myself, as in all these past days, ‘I
am on my own’?”

That was the essence of my questions or, better, of the throbbings of my
heart, during that hour and a half that I spent then in the corner on the bed,
my elbows resting on my knees, my head propped in my hands. But I knew,
I already knew even then, that all these questions were complete nonsense,
and I was drawn only by her—her and her alone! At last I’ve said it straight
out and written it with pen on paper, for even now, as I write, a year later, I
still don’t know how to call my feeling of that time by its name!
Oh, I felt sorry for Liza, and there was a most unhypocritical pain in my
heart! Just by itself this feeling of pain for her might, it seems, have
restrained and effaced, at least for a time, the carnivorousness in me (again
I mention that word). But I was drawn by boundless curiosity and a sort of
fear, and some other feeling as well—I don’t know which; but I know, and
already knew then, that it was not good. Maybe I yearned to fall at her feet,
or maybe I wanted to give her over to every torment and “quickly, quickly”
prove something to her. No pain and no compassion for Liza could stop me
now. Well, could I get up and go home . . . to Makar Ivanovich?
“But is it really impossible simply to go to them, find out everything
from them, and suddenly go away from them forever, passing unharmed by
the wonders and monsters?”
At three o’clock, catching myself and realizing that I was almost late, I
quickly went out, caught a cab, and flew to Anna Andreevna.

Chapter Five
I
AS SOON AS I was announced, Anna Andreevna dropped her sewing and
hurriedly came out to meet me in her front room—something that had never
happened before. She held out both hands to me and quickly blushed.
Silently she led me to her room, sat down to her handwork again, sat me
down beside her; but she didn’t take her sewing now, but went on
examining me with the same warm concern, not saying a word.
“You sent Nastasya Egorovna to me,” I began directly, somewhat
burdened by this all-too-spectacular concern, though it pleased me.
She suddenly spoke, not answering my question.
“I’ve heard everything, I know everything. That terrible night . . . Oh,
how you must have suffered! Is it true, is it true that you were found
unconscious in the freezing cold?”
“You got that . . . from Lambert . . .” I murmured, reddening.
“I learned everything from him right then; but I’ve been waiting for you.
Oh, he came to me so frightened! At your apartment . . . where you were
lying ill, they didn’t want to let him in to see you . . . and they met him
strangely . . . I really don’t know how it was, but he told me all about that
night; he said that, having just barely come to your senses, you mentioned
me to him and . . . your devotion to me. I was moved to tears, Arkady
Makarovich, and I don’t even know how I deserved such warm concern on
your part, and that in such a situation as you were in! Tell me, is Mr.
Lambert your childhood friend?”
“Yes, but this incident . . . I confess, I was imprudent, and maybe told
him far too much then.”

“Oh, I would have learned of this black, terrible intrigue even without
him! I always, always had a presentiment that they would drive you to that.
Tell me, is it true that Bjoring dared to raise his hand against you?”
She spoke as if it was only because of Bjoring and her that I had wound
up under the wall. And it occurred to me that she was right, but I flared up:
“If he had raised his hand against me, he wouldn’t have gone unpunished,
and I wouldn’t be sitting in front of you now unavenged,” I replied
heatedly. Above all, it seemed to me that she wanted to provoke me for
some reason, to rouse me up against somebody (however, it was clear
whom); and all the same I succumbed.
“If you say you had a presentiment that they would drive me to that, then
on Katerina Nikolaevna’s part, of course, there was only a
misunderstanding . . . though it’s also true that she was all too quick in
exchanging her good feelings towards me for this misunderstanding . . .”
“That’s precisely it, that she was all too quick!” Anna Andreevna picked
up, even in some sort of rapture of sympathy. “Oh, if you knew what an
intrigue they’ve got there now! Of course, Arkady Makarovich, it’s hard for
you now to understand all the ticklishness of my position,” she said,
blushing and looking down. “Since that same morning when we saw each
other last, I have taken a step that not every person can understand and
grasp as one with your as-yet-uncontaminated mind, with your loving,
unspoiled, fresh heart would understand it. Rest assured, my friend, that I
am capable of appreciating your devotion to me, and I will repay you with
eternal gratitude. In society, of course, they will take up stones against me,
and they already have. But even if they were right, from their vile point of
view, which of them could, which of them dared even then to condemn me?
I have been abandoned by my father since childhood; we Versilovs—an
ancient, highborn Russian family—are all strays, and I eat other people’s
bread on charity. Wouldn’t it be natural for me to turn to the one who ever
since childhood has replaced my father, whose kindness towards me I have
seen for so many years? God alone can see and judge my feelings for him,
and I do not allow society to judge me for the step I’ve taken! And when,

on top of that, there is the darkest, most perfidious intrigue, and a daughter
conspires to ruin her own trusting, magnanimous father, can that be
endured? No, let me even ruin my reputation, but I will save him! I am
ready to live in his house simply as a nurse, to watch over him, to sit by his
sickbed, but I will not give the triumph to cold, loathsome society
calculation!”
She spoke with extraordinary animation, very possibly half-affected, but
nevertheless sincere, because it could be seen to what degree she had been
wholly drawn into this affair. Oh, I could feel that she was lying (though
sincerely, because one can also lie sincerely) and that she was now bad; but
it’s astonishing how it happens with women: this air of respectability, these
lofty forms, this unapproachability of social heights and proud chastity—all
this threw me off, and I began to agree with her in everything, that is, while
I sat with her; at least I didn’t dare contradict her. Oh, man is decidedly in
moral slavery to woman, especially if he is magnanimous! Such a woman
can convince a magnanimous man of anything. “She and Lambert—my
God!” I thought, looking at her in bewilderment. However, I’ll say all: even
to this day I don’t know how to judge her; indeed God alone could see her
feelings, and besides, a human being is such a complex machine that in
some cases there’s no figuring him out, and all the more so if that being is
—a woman.
“Anna Andreevna, precisely what do you expect of me?” I asked,
however, rather resolutely.
“How’s that? What does your question mean, Arkady Makarovich?”
“It seems to me by all . . . and by certain other considerations . . .” I
explained, getting confused, “that you sent to me expecting something from
me. So what was it precisely?”
Not answering my question, she instantly began speaking again, just as
quickly and animatedly:
“But I cannot, I’m too proud to enter into discussions and deals with
unknown persons like Mr. Lambert! I’ve been waiting for you, not for Mr.

Lambert. My position is extreme, terrible, Arkady Makarovich! Surrounded
by that woman’s schemes, I’m obliged to be devious—and it’s unbearable
for me. I almost stoop to intrigues, and I’ve been waiting for you as for a
savior. I cannot be blamed that I look eagerly around me to find at least one
friend, and so I couldn’t help rejoicing over a friend: one who, even on that
night, nearly frozen, could remember me and repeat only my name alone, is
of course devoted to me. So I’ve been thinking all this time, and therefore I
put my hopes in you.”
She looked into my eyes with impatient inquiry. And here again I lacked
the courage to dissuade her and to explain to her directly that Lambert had
deceived her and that I had never told him then that I was so especially
devoted to her, and hadn’t remembered “only her name alone.” Thus, by my
silence, it was as if I confirmed Lambert’s lie. Oh, I’m sure she herself
understood very well that Lambert had exaggerated and even simply lied to
her, solely in order to have a decent pretext for coming to see her and
establishing contacts with her; and if she looked into my eyes as though
convinced of the truth of my words and of my devotion, then, of course, she
knew that I wouldn’t have dared deny it, so to speak, out of delicacy and on
account of my youth. But, anyhow, whether this guess of mine is right or
wrong—I don’t know. Maybe I’m terribly depraved.
“My brother will stand up for me,” she pronounced suddenly with ardor,
seeing that I didn’t want to reply.
“I was told that you came to my apartment with him,” I murmured in
embarrassment.
“But poor Prince Nikolai Ivanovich has almost nowhere to escape to now
from the whole intrigue, or, better, from his own daughter, except to your
apartment, that is, to a friend’s apartment; for he does have the right to
consider you at least a friend! . . . And then, if only you want to do
something for his benefit, you can do it—if only you can, if only there is
magnanimity and courage in you . . . and, finally, if it’s true that you can do
something. Oh, it’s not for me, not for me, but for a poor old man, who
alone loved you sincerely, who managed to become attached to you in his

heart as to his own son, and who longs for you even to this day! For myself
I expect nothing, even from you—if even my own father has played such a
perfidious, such a malicious escapade with me!”
“It seems to me that Andrei Petrovich . . .” I tried to begin.
“Andrei Petrovich,” she interrupted with a bitter smile, “Andrei
Petrovich, to my direct question, answered me then on his word of honor
that he never had the least intentions towards Katerina Nikolaevna, which I
fully believed when taking my step; and yet it turned out that he was calm
only until the first news about some Mr. Bjoring.”
“It’s not that!” I cried. “There was a moment when I, too, believed in his
love for this woman, but it’s not that . . . and even if it was that, it would
seem he could be perfectly calm now . . . since this gentleman has been
dismissed.”
“What gentleman?”
“Bjoring.”
“Who told you about his dismissal? This gentleman has perhaps never
been in so strong a position,” she smiled caustically; it even seemed to me
that she gave me a mocking look.
“Nastasya Egorovna told me,” I murmured in embarrassment, which I
was unable to conceal and which she noticed only too well.
“Nastasya Egorovna is a very sweet person, and I certainly cannot forbid
her to love me, but she has no means of knowing what doesn’t concern her.”
My heart was wrung; and since she was counting precisely on firing my
indignation, indignation did boil up in me, not against that woman, but so
far only against Anna Andreevna herself. I got up from my place.
“As an honest man, I must warn you, Anna Andreevna, that your
expectations . . . concerning me . . . may prove vain in the highest degree . .

.”
“I expect you to stand up for me,” she looked at me firmly, “for me, who
am abandoned by everyone . . . your sister, if you want that, Arkady
Makarovich!”
Another moment and she would have started crying.
“Well, it would be better not to, because ‘maybe’ nothing will happen,” I
babbled with an inexpressibly heavy feeling.
“How am I to take your words?” she asked somehow too warily.
“Like this, that I will leave you all and—basta! ” I suddenly exclaimed
almost in fury. “And as for the document—I’ll tear it up! Farewell!”
I bowed to her and left silently, at the same time almost not daring to
glance at her; but I had not yet reached the bottom of the stairs when
Nastasya Egorovna overtook me with a folded half-page of note paper.
Where Nastasya Egorovna had come from, and where she had been sitting
while I was talking with Anna Andreevna—I can’t even comprehend. She
didn’t say a single word, but only handed me the paper and ran back. I
unfolded it: Lambert’s address was written on it legibly and clearly, and it
had been prepared, obviously, several days earlier. I suddenly remembered
that on the day when Nastasya Egorovna had come to see me, I had let slip
to her that I didn’t know where Lambert lived, but in the sense that “I didn’t
know and didn’t want to know.” But by that time I had already learned
Lambert’s address through Liza, whom I had asked especially to make
inquiries at the information bureau. Anna Andreevna’s escapade seemed to
me too resolute, even cynical: despite my refusal to assist her, she, as if not
believing me a whit, was sending me straight to Lambert. It became only
too clear to me that she had already learned all about the document—and
from whom else if not from Lambert, to whom she was therefore sending
me to arrange things?
“Decidedly every last one of them takes me for a little boy with no will
or character, with whom anything can be done!” I thought with indignation.

II
NEVERTHELESS I WENT to Lambert’s anyway. How could I overcome
my curiosity at that time? Lambert, it turned out, lived very far away, in
Kosoy Lane, by the Summer Garden, incidentally in the same furnished
rooms; but the other time, when I had fled from him, I had been so
oblivious of the way and the distance that, when I got his address from Liza
four days earlier, I was even surprised and almost didn’t believe he lived
there. While still going up the stairs, I noticed two young men at the door to
his rooms, on the third floor, and thought they had rung before me and were
waiting to be let in. As I came up the stairs, they both turned their backs to
the door and studied me carefully. “These are furnished rooms, and they, of
course, are going to see other lodgers,” I frowned as I approached them. It
would have been very unpleasant for me to find somebody at Lambert’s.
Trying not to look at them, I reached out my hand for the bell-pull.
“Atanday,”70 one of them shouted at me.
“Please wait to ring,” the other young man said in a ringing and gentle
little voice, drawing the words out somewhat. “We’ll finish this, and then
we can all ring together if you like.”
I stopped. They were both still very young men, about twenty or twentytwo years old; they were doing something strange there by the door, and in
surprise I tried to grasp what it was. The one who had shouted atanday was
a very tall fellow, about six foot six, not less, gaunt and haggard, but very
muscular, with a very small head for his height, and a strange, sort of
comically gloomy expression on his somewhat pockmarked but not at all
stupid and even pleasant face. His eyes looked with a somehow excessive
intentness, and even a sort of unnecessary and superfluous resolution. He
was quite vilely dressed, in an old quilted cotton overcoat with a small,
shabby raccoon collar, too short for his height—obviously from someone
else’s back—and vile, almost peasant boots, and with a terribly crumpled,
discolored top hat on his head. In all he was clearly a sloven: his gloveless
hands were dirty, and his long nails were in mourning. His comrade, on the
contrary, was foppishly dressed, judging by his light polecat coat, his

elegant hat, and the light, fresh gloves on his slender fingers; he was the
same height as I, but with an extremely sweet expression on his fresh and
young little face.
The long fellow was pulling off his necktie—a completely tattered and
greasy ribbon or almost tape—and the pretty boy, having taken from his
pocket another new, black tie, just purchased, was tying it around the neck
of the long fellow, who obediently and with a terribly serious face, was
stretching out his very long neck, throwing his overcoat back from his
shoulders.
“No, it’s impossible if the shirt’s so dirty,” the young man thus occupied
said. “There not only won’t be any effect, but it will seem still dirtier. I told
you to put on a collar . . . I can’t do it . . . Maybe you can?” he suddenly
turned to me.
“Do what?” I asked.
“Here, you know, tie his necktie. You see, it has to be done in some way
so that his dirty shirt doesn’t show, otherwise there’ll be no effect, no matter
what. I just bought him a necktie from Filipp, the barber, for a rouble.”
“Was it that rouble?” the long one murmured.
“Yes, that one; now I don’t even have a kopeck. So you can’t do it? In
that case we’ll have to ask Alphonsinka.”
“To see Lambert?” the long one suddenly asked me abruptly.
“To see Lambert,” I replied with no less resolution, looking him in the
eye.
“Dolgorowky?” 19 he repeated in the same tone and the same voice.
“No, not Korovkin,” I replied just as abruptly, having misheard.

“Dolgorowky?! ” the long one almost shouted, repeating himself, and
coming at me almost menacingly. His comrade burst out laughing.
“He’s saying Dolgorowky, not Korovkin,” he clarified. “You know how
the French in the Journal des débats often distort Russian last names . . .”
“In the Indépendance,” 20 the long one grunted.
“. . . Well, in the Indépendance, too, it makes no difference. Dolgoruky,
for instance, is written Dolgorowky, I’ve read it myself, and V—v is always
Comte Wallonie f.”
“Doboyny! ” cried the long one.
“Yes, there’s also some Doboyny. I read it myself and we both laughed:
some Russian Mme. Doboyny, abroad . . . only, you see, why mention them
all?” he suddenly turned to the long one.
“Excuse me, are you Mr. Dolgoruky?”
“Yes, I’m Dolgoruky, but how do you know?”
The long one suddenly whispered something to the pretty boy, who
frowned and made a negative gesture; but the long one suddenly turned to
me:
“Monsieur le prince, vous n’avez pas de rouble d’argent pour nous, pas
deux, mais un seul, voulez-vous?”71
“Ah, how vile you are!” cried the boy.
“Nous vous rendons,”72 the long one concluded, pronouncing the French
words crudely and awkwardly.
“He’s a cynic, you know,” the boy smiled to me. “And do you think he
doesn’t know how to speak French? He speaks like a Parisian, and he’s only

mocking those Russians who want to speak French aloud among
themselves in society, but don’t know how . . .”
“Dans les wagons,”73 the long one clarified.
“Well, yes, in railway carriages, too—ah, what a bore you are, there’s
nothing to clarify! A nice fancy to pretend you’re a fool.”
Meanwhile I took out a rouble and offered it to the long one.
“Nous vous rendons,” the man said, pocketing the rouble, and, suddenly
turning to the door, with a perfectly immobile and serious face he began
banging on it with the toe of his enormous, crude boot and, above all,
without the slightest irritation.
“Ah, you’re going to have a fight with Lambert again!” the boy observed
uneasily. “You’d better ring!”
I rang, but the long one still went on banging with his boot.
“Ah, sacré . . .”74; Lambert’s voice suddenly came from behind the door,
and he quickly opened it.
“Dites donc, voulez-vous que je vous casse la tête, mon ami!”
shouted at the long one.

he

“Mon ami, voilà Dolgorowky, l’autre mon ami,” 75 the long one
pronounced importantly and seriously, looking point-blank at Lambert, who
had turned red with anger. As soon as he saw me, he was as if all
transformed at once.
“It’s you, Arkady! At last! So you’re well now, you’re well at last?”
He seized me by the hands, pressing them hard; in short, he was so
sincerely delighted that I instantly felt terribly pleased, and even began to
like him.

“You’re the first one I’m calling on!”
“Alphonsine!” cried Lambert.
The woman instantly leaped out from behind the screen.
“Le voilà!”76
“C’est lui!”77 exclaimed Alphonsine, clasping her hands, and, spreading
them wide again, she rushed to embrace me, but Lambert came to my
defense.
“No, no, no, down!” he shouted at her as if she were a puppy. “You see,
Arkady, a few of us fellows have arranged to have dinner at the Tartar’s
today. I won’t let you off, come with us. We’ll have dinner; I’ll chase these
boys out at once—and then we can talk as much as we like. But do come in!
We’re leaving right away, just stay for a little minute . . .”
I went in and stood in the middle of that room, looking around and
remembering. Lambert was hastily changing his clothes behind the screen.
The long one and his comrade also came in with us, despite Lambert’s
words. We all remained standing.
“Mlle. Alphonsine, voulez-vous me baiser?”78 the long one grunted.
“Mlle. Alphonsine,” the younger one made a movement, pointing to the
little tie, but she fell fiercely on them both.
“Ah, le petit vilain! ” she cried to the younger one. “Ne m’approcher pas,
ne me salissez pas, et vous, le grand dadais, je vous flanque à la porte tous
les deux, savez-vous cela!” 79;
The younger one, in spite of her waving him away scornfully and
squeamishly, as if she really was afraid to dirty herself by touching him
(which I couldn’t understand, because he was so pretty and turned out to be
so well dressed when he threw off his fur coat)—the younger one began
begging her insistently to tie the necktie on his long friend, after first tying

one of Lambert’s clean collars on him. She almost started beating them, she
was so indignant at this suggestion, but Lambert, having heard it, cried to
her from behind the screen that she shouldn’t hamper them and should do as
she was asked, “otherwise they won’t leave you alone,” he added, and
Alphonsine instantly seized the collar and began tying it on the long one,
now without the slightest squeamishness. Just as on the stairs, the man
stretched his neck out for her while she tied it.
“Mlle. Alphonsine, avez-vous vendu votre bologne?”80 he asked.
“Qu’est-ce que ça, ma bologne?”81
The younger one explained that ma bologne signified her little Bolognese
lap dog.
“Tiens, quel est ce baragouin?”82
“Je parle comme une dame russe sur les eaux minérales,”83; observed le
grand dadais, his neck still stretched out.
“Qu’est-ce que ça qu’une dame russe sure les eaux minérales et . . . où
est donc votre jolie montre, que Lambert vous a donné?” she suddenly
turned to the younger one.
“What, no watch again?” Lambert echoed irritably from behind the
screen.
“We ate it up!” le grand dadais grunted.
“I sold it for eight roubles. It was gilded silver, and you told me it was
gold. Ones like that, in a shop now, cost only sixteen roubles,” the younger
one replied to Lambert, justifying himself with reluctance.
“We must put an end to this!” Lambert went on still more irritably. “I
don’t buy you clothes, my young friend, and give you beautiful things, so
that you can waste it all on your long friend . . . What’s this tie you’ve
bought?”

“That was only a rouble; it wasn’t yours. He didn’t have any tie at all,
and he still needs to buy a hat.”
“Nonsense!” Lambert was now angry indeed. “I gave him enough for a
hat as well, and he up and bought oysters and champagne. He smells; he’s a
sloven; he can’t be taken anywhere. How can I take him to dinner?”
“In a cab,” the dadais grunted. “Nous avons un rouble d’argent que nous
avons prêté chez notre nouvel ami.”84
“Don’t give them anything, Arkady!” Lambert cried again.
“Excuse me, Lambert, I demand outright that you give me ten roubles
here and now,” the boy suddenly became angry and even turned all red,
which made him twice as good-looking, “and don’t you ever dare to say
foolish things, as you just did to Dolgoruky. I demand ten roubles, one
rouble to give back to Dolgoruky right now, and the rest to buy Andreev a
hat at once—you’ll see for yourself.”
Lambert came from behind the screen:
“Here’s three yellow notes, three roubles, and nothing more till Tuesday,
and don’t you dare . . . or else . . .”
Le grand dadais snatched the money from him.
“Dolgorowky, here’s the rouble, nous vous rendons avec beaucoup de
grâce.85 Petya, let’s go!” he cried to his comrade, and then, holding up the
two notes, waving them and looking point-blank at Lambert, he suddenly
screamed with all his might:
“Ohé, Lambert! où est Lambert, as-tu vu Lambert?”86
“Don’t you dare, don’t you dare!” Lambert also screamed in the most
terrible wrath. I saw that there was something previous in all this, totally
unknown to me, and I gazed in astonishment. But the long one wasn’t
frightened in the least by Lambert’s wrath; on the contrary, he screamed still

louder: “Ohé, Lambert! ” and so on. With this shouting they went out to the
stairs. Lambert started after them, but then came back.
“Eh, soon I’ll thr-r-row them out on their ears! They cost more than they
bring in . . . Come on, Arkady! I’m late. There’s yet another necessary man
. . . waiting for me . . . Also a brute . . . They’re all brutes! Tghrash,
tghrash!” he cried again and almost ground his teeth; but all at once he
came fully to his senses. “I’m glad you finally came. Alphonsine, not a step
from the house! Let’s go!”
By the porch, a smart trotter was waiting for him. We got in; but even all
the way he still couldn’t recover from some sort of fury against those young
men and calm down. I marveled that it was so serious, and that, besides,
they were all so irreverent with Lambert, while he all but even cowered
before them. To me, by an ingrown old impression from childhood, it
always seemed that everyone must fear Lambert, so that, despite all my
independence, I myself probably cowered before Lambert at that moment.
“I tell you, they’re all terrible tghrash,” Lambert couldn’t calm down.
“Would you believe it, that tall, vile one tormented me three days ago, in
good society. He stands in front of me and shouts: ‘Ohé, Lambert! ’ In good
society! Everybody laughs and knows that it’s to get money from me—can
you imagine. I gave it. Oh, they’re scoundrels! Would you believe it, he was
a junker21 in a regiment and got thrown out, and, can you imagine, he’s
educated; he was brought up in a good home, can you imagine! He has
thoughts, he could . . . Eh, the devil! And he’s strong as Hercule. He’s
useful, but not very. And you can see he doesn’t wash his hands. I
recommended him to a certain lady, an old noble lady, saying that he had
repented and wanted to kill himself from remorse, and he came to her, sat
down, and whistled. And the other, the pretty one, is a general’s son; the
family’s ashamed of him, I pulled him out of a trial, I saved him, and this is
how he repays me. There are no people here! On their ears, on their ears!”
“They know my name; did you speak to them about me?”

“I had the stupidity. Please sit through dinner, brace yourself . . . Another
awful canaille is coming. This one is really an awful canaille, and he’s
terribly cunning; they’re all scum here; not a single honest man! Well, so
we’ll finish—and then . . . What do you like to eat? Well, it makes no
difference, they have good food there. I’m paying, don’t worry. It’s a good
thing you’re well dressed. I can give you money. Come any time. Imagine, I
wined and dined them here, there was cabbage pie every day; that watch he
sold, it’s the second time. The little one, Trishatov—you saw him,
Alphonsine even scorns to look at him and forbids him to come near her—
and suddenly, in a restaurant, in front of some officers, he says, ‘I’ll have
snipe.’ I gave him snipe! Only I’ll get my revenge.”
“Remember, Lambert, how we drove to a tavern in Moscow, and in the
tavern you stabbed me with a fork, and how you had five hundred roubles
then?”
“Yes, I remember! Eh, the devil, I do! I like you . . . Believe that. Nobody
likes you, but I do; I’m the only one, remember . . . The one who’s coming,
the pockmarked one, is the most cunning canaille; don’t say anything to
him if he starts talking, and if he starts asking questions, answer with
nonsense, keep mum . . .”
At any rate, on account of his excitement, he didn’t ask me anything on
the way. I even felt offended that he was so sure of me and didn’t even
suspect any mistrust in me; it seemed to me that he had the stupid notion
that he could still order me around. “And besides, he’s terribly uneducated,”
I thought, going into the restaurant.

III
I USED TO go to this restaurant on Morskaya22 before, during the time of
my infamous decadence and depravity, and therefore the impression of
these rooms, these waiters, looking me over and recognizing me as a
familiar visitor, the impression, finally, of this mysterious company of
Lambert’s friends, in which I had so suddenly found myself and to which I
already seemed to belong indivisibly, and above all—the dark foreboding

that I was voluntarily heading for some sort of vileness and would
undoubtedly end up in bad business—it was as if all this suddenly pierced
me. There was a moment when I almost left; but the moment passed and I
stayed.
That “pockmarked one” Lambert was so afraid of for some reason was
already waiting for us. He was a small man with one of those stupidly
businesslike appearances, a type I’ve hated almost since childhood; about
forty-five years old, of medium height, with some gray in his hair, with a
face clean-shaven to the point of vileness, and with small, regular, gray,
trimmed side-whiskers in the form of two little sausages on the two cheeks
of an extremely flat and wicked face. Naturally, he was dull, serious,
taciturn, and even, as is usual with all these wretched little people, for some
reason arrogant. He scrutinized me very attentively but didn’t say a word,
and Lambert was so stupid that, in seating us at the same table, he felt no
need to introduce us, so that the man might have taken me for one of
Lambert’s blackmailing associates. To those young people (who arrived
almost at the same time as we did) he also said nothing all through dinner,
but it could be seen, nevertheless, that he knew them closely. He talked
about something only with Lambert, and then almost in a whisper, and then
it was almost only Lambert who talked, while the pockmarked one just got
off with fragmentary and angry ultimatums. He behaved superciliously, was
spiteful and jeering, whereas Lambert, on the contrary, was in great
agitation and evidently kept persuading him, probably trying to win him
over to some venture. Once I reached for the bottle of red wine; the
pockmarked one suddenly took a bottle of sherry and handed it to me,
having not said a word to me till then.
“Try this,” he said, offering me the bottle. Here I suddenly realized that
he must already know everything in the world about me—my story, and my
name, and maybe why Lambert was counting on me. The thought that he
might take me for someone in Lambert’s service infuriated me again, and
Lambert’s face expressed a very strong and stupid alarm as soon as the man
addressed me. The pockmarked one noticed it and laughed. “Lambert
decidedly depends on everybody,” I thought, hating him at that moment
with all my soul. Thus, though we sat through the whole dinner at one table,

we were divided into two groups: the pockmarked one and Lambert nearer
the window, facing each other, and I next to the greasy Andreev, with
Trishatov facing me. Lambert hurried with the meal, urging the waiter to
serve every minute. When champagne was served, he suddenly reached out
his glass to me.
“To your health, let’s clink!” he said, interrupting his conversation with
the pockmarked one.
“And will you allow me to clink with you?” The pretty Trishatov reached
out his glass to me across the table. Before the champagne he had been
somehow very pensive and silent. The dadais said nothing at all, but ate
silently and a lot.
“With pleasure,” I replied to Trishatov. We clinked glasses and drank.
“And I won’t drink to your health,” the dadais suddenly turned to me,
“not because I wish for your death, but so that you won’t drink anymore
here today.” He uttered it gloomily and weightily. “Three glasses are
enough for you. I see you’re looking at my unwashed fist?” he went on,
displaying his fist on the table. “I don’t wash it, and rent it out to Lambert
unwashed as it is, for crushing other people’s heads on occasions that
Lambert finds ticklish.” And, having said that, he suddenly banged his fist
on the table with such force that all the plates and glasses jumped. Besides
us, there were people dining at four other tables in this room, all of them
officers and various imposing-looking gentlemen. It was a fashionable
restaurant; for a moment everybody stopped talking and looked at our
corner. And it seems we had long been arousing some curiosity. Lambert
turned all red.
“Hah, he’s at it again! I believe I asked you to behave yourself, Nikolai
Semyonovich,” he said to Andreev in a fierce whisper. The man looked him
over with a long and slow stare:
“I don’t want my new friend Dolgorowky to drink much wine here
today.”

Lambert turned still more red. The pockmarked one listened silently, but
with visible pleasure. For some reason he liked Andreev’s escapade. I was
the only one who didn’t understand why I shouldn’t drink.
“He only does it to get money! You’ll get another seven roubles, do you
hear, after dinner—only let us finish eating, don’t disgrace us,” Lambert
rasped to him.
“Aha!” the dadais grunted victoriously. This quite delighted the
pockmarked one, and he sniggered maliciously.
“Listen, you’re much too . . .” Trishatov said to his friend with
uneasiness and almost with suffering, evidently wishing to restrain him.
Andreev fell silent, but not for long; that was not how he reckoned. At a
table about five steps away from us, two gentlemen were dining and having
a lively conversation. They were both middle-aged gentlemen of an
extremely ticklish appearance. One was tall and very fat, the other also very
fat but small. They were talking in Polish about the current Parisian events.
The dadais had long been glancing at them curiously and listening. The
little Pole obviously struck him as a comic figure, and he hated him at once,
after the manner of all bilious and liverish people, to whom this always
happens suddenly even without any cause. Suddenly the little Pole spoke
the name of the deputy Madier de Montjau,23 but following the habit of a
great many Poles, he pronounced it in a Polish manner, that is, with the
stress on the next-to-last syllable, and it came out not as Madiér de
Montjáu, but as Mádier de Móntjau. That was all the dadais needed. He
turned to the Poles and, drawing himself up importantly, suddenly said
distinctly and loudly, as though asking them a question:
“Mádier de Móntjau?”
The Poles turned to him fiercely.
“What do you want?” the big fat Pole cried menacingly in Russian. The
dadais bided his time.

“Mádier de Móntjau?” he suddenly repeated for the whole room to hear,
without giving any further explanations, just as he had stupidly repeated
“Dolgorowky?” as he came at me earlier by the door. The Poles jumped up
from their places, Lambert jumped up from the table, rushed first to
Andreev, but then abandoned him, leaped over to the Poles, and humbly
began apologizing to them.
“They’re buffoons, panie,87 buffoons!” the little Pole repeated
contemptuously, all red as a carrot with indignation. “Soon it will be
impossible to come here!” There was a stirring in the room, some
murmuring was heard, but more laughter.
“Leave . . . please . . . let’s go now!” Lambert murmured, completely at a
loss, trying somehow to get Andreev out of the room. Giving Lambert a
searching look and figuring that at this point he could get money from him,
the man agreed to follow him. It was probably not the first time he had used
this shameless method to knock money out of Lambert. Trishatov also made
as if to run after them, but looked at me and stayed.
“Ah, how nasty!” he said, covering his eyes with his slender fingers.
“Very nasty, sirs,” the pockmarked one whispered this time with a very
angered air. Meanwhile Lambert came back almost completely pale and,
with lively gesticulations, began whispering something to the pockmarked
one. The latter meanwhile ordered the waiter to quickly serve coffee. He
listened squeamishly; he evidently wanted to leave quickly. And,
nevertheless, the whole incident was merely a schoolboy prank. Trishatov,
with his cup of coffee, came over from his place and sat next to me.
“I like him very much,” he began, addressing me with such a candid air
as though he had always been talking to me about it. “You wouldn’t believe
how unhappy Andreev is. He ate and drank up his sister’s dowry, and ate
and drank up everything they had, the year he served in the army, and I can
see how he suffers now. And as for his not washing—it’s from despair. And
he has terribly strange thoughts: he suddenly tells you that a scoundrel and
an honest man are all the same and there’s no difference; and that there’s no

need to do anything, either good or bad, or it’s all the same—you can do
either good or bad, but the best thing of all is to lie there without taking
your clothes off for a month at a time, drink, eat, sleep—and that’s all. But,
believe me, he just says it. And you know, I even think he carried on like
that just now because he wanted to finish completely with Lambert. He
spoke of it yesterday. Believe me, sometimes at night or when he’s been
sitting alone for a long time, he begins to weep, and, you know, when he
weeps, it’s in some special way, as no one else weeps: he starts howling,
howling terribly, and that, you know, is still more pitiful . . . And besides,
he’s so big and strong, and suddenly—he’s just howling. Such a poor
fellow, isn’t it so? I want to save him, but I’m such a nasty, lost little brat
myself, you wouldn’t believe it! Will you let me in, Dolgoruky, if I ever
come to see you?”
“Oh, do come, I even like you.”
“What on earth for? Well, but thank you. Listen, let’s drink another glass.
Though—what’s the matter with me?—you’d better not drink. It’s true what
he said, that you mustn’t drink more,” he suddenly winked at me
significantly, “but I’ll drink even so. I’m all right now, but, believe me, I
can’t restrain myself in anything. Just tell me I’m not to dine in restaurants
anymore, and I’m ready for anything just to go and do it. Oh, we sincerely
want to be honest, I assure you, only we keep postponing it.
And the years go by—all the best years!24
And I’m terribly afraid he’ll hang himself. He’ll go and not tell anybody.
He’s like that. Nowadays they all hang themselves; who knows—maybe
there are a lot like us? I, for instance, simply can’t live without spare cash.
The spare cash is much more important for me than the necessary. Listen,
do you like music? I’m terribly fond of it. I’ll play something for you when
I come to see you. I play the piano very well, and I studied for a long time. I
studied seriously. If I were to write an opera, you know, I’d take the subject
from Faust.25 I like that theme very much. I keep creating the scene in the
cathedral, just so, imagining it in my head. A Gothic cathedral, inside,
choirs, hymns, Gretchen enters, and, you know, the choirs are medieval, so

that you can just hear the fifteenth century. Gretchen is in grief, first there’s
a recitative, quiet but terrible, tormenting, but the choirs rumble gloomily,
sternly, indifferently:
Dies irae, dies illa!26
And suddenly—the devil’s voice, the devil’s song. He’s invisible, it’s just a
song, alongside the hymns, together with the hymns, it almost coincides
with them, and yet it’s quite different—it has to be done that way somehow.
The song is long, tireless, it’s a tenor, it must be a tenor. He starts quietly,
tenderly: ‘Remember, Gretchen, how you, still innocent, still a child, used
to come with your mama to this cathedral and prattle out your prayers from
an old book?’ But the song grows stronger, more passionate, more
impetuous; the notes get higher: there are tears in it, anguish, tireless,
hopeless, and, finally, despair: ‘There is no forgiveness, Gretchen, there is
no forgiveness for you here!’ Gretchen wants to pray, but only cries burst
from her breast—you know, when your breast is contracted with tears—but
Satan’s song doesn’t stop, ever more deeply it pierces the soul, like a sharp
point, ever higher—and suddenly it breaks off almost with a shout: ‘It’s all
over, you are cursed!’ Gretchen falls on her knees, clasps her hands before
her—and here comes her prayer, something very short, half recitative, but
naïve, without any polish, something medieval in the highest degree, four
lines, only four lines in all—there are several such notes in Stradella27—and
at the last note she swoons! Commotion. She’s lifted, borne up—and here
suddenly a thundering choir. It’s like an assault of voices, an inspired
chorus, victorious, overwhelming, something like our ‘Up-borne-by-the-angel-ichosts’28—so that everything’s shaken to its foundations, and
everything changes into an ecstatic, exultant, universal exclamation
—‘Hosanna!’—as if it were the cry of the whole universe, and she’s borne
up, borne up, and here the curtain falls! No, you know, if I could, I’d have
done something! Only I can’t do anything now, but only keep dreaming. I
keep dreaming and dreaming; my whole life has turned into a dream, I even
dream at night. Ah, Dolgoruky, have you read Dickens’s Old Curiosity
Shop?”
“I have. What about it?”

“Do you remember . . . Wait, I’ll drink another glass . . . Do you
remember that place at the end, when they—that crazy old man and that
lovely thirteen-year-old girl, his granddaughter—after their fantastic flight
and wanderings, finally find refuge somewhere on the edge of England,
near some medieval Gothic cathedral, and the girl obtains some post there,
showing the cathedral to visitors . . . And then, once, the sun is setting, and
this child is standing on the porch of the cathedral, all bathed in the last
rays, standing and watching the sunset with quiet, pensive contemplation in
her child’s soul, a soul astonished as before some riddle, because the one
and the other are like a riddle—the sun as God’s thought, and the cathedral
as man’s thought . . . isn’t it so? Oh, I don’t know how to express it, only
God likes such first thoughts from children . . . And there, next to her on the
steps, this mad old man, the grandfather, stares at her with a fixed gaze . . .
You know, there’s nothing special in this picture from Dickens, absolutely
nothing, but you’ll never forget it, and this remains in all of Europe—why?
Here is the beautiful! Here is innocence! Eh! I don’t know what it is, only
it’s good. I was always reading novels in high school. You know, I have a
sister in the country, only a year older than me . . . Oh, it’s all been sold
there now, and there’s no longer any estate! We sat on the terrace, under our
old lindens, and read that novel, and the sun was also setting, and suddenly
we stopped reading and said to each other that we, too, would be good, and
we, too, would be beautiful—I was preparing for the university then and . . .
Ah, Dolgoruky, you know, each of us has his memories! . . .”
And suddenly he leaned his pretty little head on my shoulder—and wept.
I felt very, very sorry for him. True, he had drunk a lot of wine, but he had
talked so sincerely with me, like a brother, with such feeling . . . Suddenly,
at that moment, a shout came from the street and a strong rapping of
knuckles on our window (the windows here are one-piece, big, and it was
on the ground floor as well, so that it’s possible to knock from the street). It
was the ejected Andreev.
‘Ohé, Lambert! Où est Lambert? As-tu vu Lambert?” his wild shout
resounded in the street.

“Ah, but he’s here! So he hasn’t gone?” exclaimed my boy, tearing from
his place.
“The check!” Lambert rasped to the waiter. His hands even trembled with
anger as he went to pay, but the pockmarked one wouldn’t let Lambert pay
for him.
“But why? Didn’t I invite you, didn’t you accept the invitation?”
“No, permit me.” The pockmarked one took out his purse and, having
calculated his share, paid separately.
“You offend me, Semyon Sidorych!”
“That’s how I want it, sir,” Semyon Sidorovich snapped and, taking his
hat and not saying good-bye to anyone, walked out of the room alone.
Lambert threw the money at the waiter and hastily ran out after him, even
forgetting about me in his confusion. Trishatov and I went out after all the
rest. Andreev was standing by the entrance like a milepost, waiting for
Trishatov.
“Blackguard!” Lambert couldn’t keep from saying.
“Uh-uh!” Andreev growled at him, and with one swing of his arm he
knocked off his round hat, which rolled along the pavement. The humiliated
Lambert rushed to pick it up.
“Vingt-cinq roubles!”88 Andreev showed Trishatov the banknote he had
wrested from Lambert earlier.
“Enough,” Trishatov cried to him. “Why do you keep making a row? . . .
And why did you skin him for twenty-five roubles? You only had seven
coming.”
“What do you mean, skin him? He promised we’d dine in a private room
with Athenian women, and he served up the pockmarked one instead of the
women, and, besides that, I didn’t finish eating and froze in the cold a sure

eighteen roubles’ worth. He had seven roubles outstanding, which makes
exactly twenty-five for you.”
“Get the hell out of here, both of you!” yelled Lambert. “I’m throwing
you both out, and I’ll tie you in little knots . . .”
“Lambert, I’m throwing you out, and I’ll tie you in little knots!” cried
Andreev. “Adieu, mon prince,89 don’t drink any more wine! Off we go,
Petya! Ohé, Lambert! Où est Lambert? As-tu vu Lambert?” he roared one
last time, moving off with enormous strides.
“So I’ll come to see you, may I?” Trishatov hastily babbled to me,
hurrying after his friend.
Lambert and I remained alone.
“ Well . . . let’s go!” he uttered, as if he had difficulty catching his breath
and even as if demented.
“Where should I go? I’m not going anywhere with you!” I hastened to
cry in defiance.
“How do you mean, not going?” he roused himself up fearfully, coming
to his senses all at once. “But I’ve only been waiting for us to be left
alone!”
“But where on earth can we go?” I confess, I also had a slight ringing in
my head from the three glasses of champagne and two of sherry.
“This way, over this way, you see?”
“But the sign says fresh oysters, you see? It’s a foul-smelling place . . .”
“That’s because you’ve just eaten, but it’s Miliutin’s shop; we won’t eat
oysters, I’ll give you champagne . . .”
“I don’t want it! You want to get me drunk.”

“They told you that; they were laughing at you. You believe the
scoundrels!”
“No, Trishatov is not a scoundrel. But I myself know how to be careful—
that’s what!”
“So you’ve got your own character?”
“Yes, I’ve got character, a bit more than you have, because you’re
enslaved to the first comer. You disgraced us, you apologized to the Poles
like a lackey. You must have been beaten often in taverns?”
“But we have to have a talk, cghretin!” he cried with that scornful
impatience which all but said, “And you’re at it, too?” “What, are you
afraid or something? Are you my friend or not?”
“I’m not your friend, and you’re a crook. Let’s go, if only to prove that
I’m not afraid of you. Ah, what a foul smell, it smells of cheese! What
nastiness!”

Chapter Six
I
I ASK YOU once more to remember that I had a slight ringing in my head;
if it hadn’t been for that, I would have talked and acted differently. In the
back room of this shop one could actually eat oysters, and we sat down at a
little table covered with a foul, dirty cloth. Lambert ordered champagne; a
glass of cold, golden-colored wine appeared before me and looked at me
temptingly; but I was vexed.
“You see, Lambert, what mainly offends me is that you think you can
order me around now, as you used to at Touchard’s, while you yourself are
enslaved by everybody here.”
“Cghretin! Eh, let’s clink!”
“You don’t even deign to pretend before me; you might at least conceal
that you want to get me drunk.”
“You’re driveling, and you’re drunk. You have to drink more, and you’ll
be more cheerful. Take your glass, go on, take it!”
“What’s all this ‘go on, take it’? I’m leaving, and that’s the end of it.”
And I actually made as if to get up. He became terribly angry.
“It’s Trishatov whispering to you against me: I saw the two of you
whispering there. You’re a cghretin in that case. Alphonsine is even
repulsed when he comes near her . . . He’s vile. I’ll tell you what he’s like.”
“You’ve already said it. All you’ve got is Alphonsine, you’re terribly
narrow.”

“Narrow?” He didn’t understand. “They’ve gone over to the pockmarked
one now. That’s what! That’s why I threw them out. They’re dishonest. That
pockmarked villain will corrupt them, too. But I always demanded that they
behave nobly.”
I sat down, took the glass somehow mechanically, and drank a gulp.
“I’m incomparably superior to you in education,” I said. But he was only
too glad that I had sat down, and at once poured me more wine.
“So you’re afraid of them?” I went on teasing him (and at that point I was
certainly more vile than he was himself ). “Andreev knocked your hat off,
and you gave him twenty-five roubles for it.”
“I did, but he’ll pay me back. They’re rebellious, but I’ll tie them into . .
.”
“You’re very worried about the pockmarked one. And you know, it seems
to me that I’m the only one you’ve got left now. All your hopes are resting
on me alone now—eh?”
“Yes, Arkashka, that’s so: you’re my only remaining friend; you put it so
well!” he slapped me on the shoulder.
What could be done with such a crude man? He was totally undeveloped
and took mockery for praise.
“You could save me from some bad things, if you were a good comrade,
Arkady,” he went on, looking at me affectionately.
“In what way could I save you?”
“You know what way. Without me you’re like a cghretin, and you’re sure
to be stupid, but I’d give you thirty thousand, and we’d go halves, and you
yourself know how. Well, who are you, just look: you’ve got nothing—no
name, no family—and here’s a pile all at once; and on such money you
know what a career you can start!”

I was simply amazed at such a method. I had decidedly assumed he
would dodge, but he began with such directness, such boyish directness,
with me. I decided to listen to him out of breadth and . . . out of terrible
curiosity.
“You see, Lambert, you won’t understand this, but I agree to listen to you
because I’m broad,” I declared firmly and took another sip from the glass.
Lambert at once refilled it.
“Here’s the thing, Arkady: if a man like Bjoring dared to heap abuse on
me and strike me in front of a lady I adored, I don’t know what I’d do! But
you took it, and I find you repulsive, you’re a dishrag!”
“How dare you say Bjoring struck me!” I cried, turning red. “It’s rather I
who struck him, and not he me.”
“No, he struck you, not you him.”
“Lies, I also stepped on his foot!”
“But he shoved you with his arm and told the lackeys to drag you away .
. . and she sat and watched from the carriage and laughed at you—she
knows you have no father and can be insulted.”
“I don’t know, Lambert, we’re having a schoolboy conversation, which
I’m ashamed of. You’re doing it to get me all worked up, and so crudely
and openly, as if I were some sort of sixteen-year-old. You arranged it with
Anna Andreevna!” I cried, trembling with anger and mechanically sipping
wine all the while.
“Anna Andreevna is a rascal! She’ll hoodwink you, and me, and the
whole world! I’ve been waiting for you, because you’re better able to finish
with the other one.”
“What other one?”

“With Madame Akhmakov. I know everything. You told me yourself that
she’s afraid of the letter you’ve got . . .”
“What letter . . . you’re lying . . . Have you seen her?” I muttered in
confusion.
“I’ve seen her. She’s good-looking. Très belle,90 and you’ve got taste.”
“I know you’ve seen her; only you didn’t dare to speak with her, and I
want you also not to dare to speak of her.”
“You’re still little, and she laughs at you—that’s what! We had a pillar of
virtue like her in Moscow! Oh, how she turned up her nose! But she
trembled when we threatened to tell all, and she obeyed at once; and we
took the one and the other: both the money and the other thing—you
understand what? Now she’s back in society, unapproachable—pah, the
devil, how high she flies, and what a carriage, and if only you’d seen in
what sort of back room it all went on! You haven’t lived enough; if you
knew what little back rooms they’ll venture into . . .”
“So I’ve thought,” I murmured irrepressibly.
“They’re depraved to the tips of their fingers; you don’t know what
they’re capable of! Alphonsine lived in one such house; she found it quite
repulsive.”
“I’ve thought about that,” I confirmed again.
“They beat you, and you feel sorry . . .”
“Lambert, you’re a villain, curse you!” I cried out, suddenly somehow
understanding and trembling. “I saw it all in a dream, you stood there, and
Anna Andreevna . . . Oh, curse you! Did you really think I was such a
scoundrel? I saw it in a dream, because I just knew you were going to say it.
And, finally, all this can’t be so simple that you’d tell me about it all so
simply and directly!”

“Look how angry he is! Tut-tut-tut!” Lambert drawled, laughing and
triumphant. “Well, brother Arkashka, now I’ve learned all I needed to
know. That’s why I was waiting for you. Listen, it means you love her and
want to take revenge on Bjoring—that’s what I needed to know. I suspected
it all along, while I was waiting for you. Ceci posé, celà change la
question.91 And so much the better, because she loves you herself. So get
married, don’t delay, that’s the best. And you can’t possibly do otherwise,
you’ve hit on the right thing. And then know, Arkady, that you have a friend
—me, that is—whom you can saddle and ride on. This friend will help you
and get you married; I’ll leave no stone unturned, Arkasha! And afterwards
you can give your old friend thirty thousand for his labors, eh? But I will
help you, don’t doubt that. I know all the fine points in these matters, and
they’ll give you a whole dowry, and you’ll be a rich man with a career!”
Though my head was spinning, I looked at Lambert in amazement. He
was serious, that is, not really serious, but I could see clearly that he fully
believed in the possibility of getting me married, and even accepted the idea
with rapture. Naturally, I also saw that he was trying to ensnare me like a
little boy (I saw it right then for certain), but the thought of marrying her so
pierced me through that, though I was astonished at Lambert’s ability to
believe in such a fantasy, at the same time I rushed to believe it myself,
though without losing even for a moment the awareness that, of course, it
couldn’t be realized for anything. It somehow all sank in together.
“Can it be possible?” I babbled.
“Why not? You’ll show her the document—she’ll turn coward and marry
you so as not to lose the money.”
I decided not to stop Lambert in his meanness, because he laid it out for
me so simpleheartedly that he didn’t even suspect I might suddenly become
indignant; but I murmured, nevertheless, that I wouldn’t want to marry only
by force.
“Not for anything do I want to use force; how can you be so mean as to
suppose that in me?”

“Ehh! She’ll marry you of herself: it won’t be your doing, she’ll get
frightened herself and marry you. And she’ll also do it because she loves
you,” Lambert caught himself.
“That’s a lie. You’re laughing at me. How do you know she loves me?”
“Absolutely. I know. And Anna Andreevna thinks so, too. I’m telling you
seriously and truthfully that Anna Andreevna thinks so. And then I’ll also
tell you another thing, when you come to my place, and you’ll see that she
loves you. Alphonsine was in Tsarskoe; she also found things out there . . .”
“What could she have found out there?”
“Let’s go to my place. She’ll tell you herself, and you’ll be pleased. What
makes you worse than another man? You’re handsome, you’re well bred . .
.”
“Yes, I’m well bred,” I whispered, barely pausing for breath. My heart
was throbbing and, of course, not from wine alone.
“You’re handsome. You’re well dressed.”
“Yes, I’m well dressed . . .”
“And you’re kind . . .”
“Yes, I’m kind.”
“Then why shouldn’t she agree? After all, Bjoring won’t take her without
money, and you can deprive her of money—so she’ll get frightened; you’ll
marry her, and that will be your revenge on Bjoring. You told me yourself
that night, after you froze, that she was in love with you.”
“Did I tell you that? Surely I didn’t put it that way.”
“No, that way.”

“I was delirious. Surely I must also have told you then about the
document?”
“Yes, you said you had this letter, and I thought: since he has such a
letter, why should he lose what’s his?”
“This is all fantasy, and I’m by no means so stupid as to believe it,” I
muttered. “First, there’s the difference in age, and, second, I have no name.”
“She’ll marry you; she can’t do otherwise when so much money’s to be
lost—I’ll arrange that. And besides, she loves you. You know, that old
prince is quite well disposed towards you; through his patronage you know
what sort of connections you could make; and as for the fact that you have
no name, nowadays that’s all unnecessary: once you’ve grabbed the money,
you’ll get on, you’ll get on, and in ten years you’ll be such a millionaire that
all Russia will be talking, and what name do you need then? You can buy
up a baron in Austria. But once you marry her, you’ll have to keep her in
hand. They need it good and proper. A woman, if she’s in love, likes to be
kept in a tight fist. A woman likes character in a man. But once you frighten
her with the letter, from that time on you’ll also show her your character.
‘Ah,’ she’ll say, ‘so young, but he’s got character.’”
I was sitting there as if bemused. Never would I have stooped to such a
stupid conversation with anyone else. But here some sweet longing drew
me into continuing it. Besides, Lambert was so stupid and mean that it was
impossible to be ashamed before him.
“No, Lambert, you know,” I said suddenly, “as you like, but there’s a lot
of nonsense here; I’m talking to you because we’re comrades, and there’s
nothing for us to be ashamed of; but with anyone else I wouldn’t have
demeaned myself for anything. And, above all, why do you insist so much
that she loves me? You spoke very well about capital just now, but you see,
Lambert, you don’t know high society: with them it all rests on the most
patriarchal, familial, so to speak, relations, so that now, when she still
doesn’t know my abilities and how far I may get in life—now in any case
she’ll be ashamed. But I won’t conceal from you, Lambert, that there is

indeed one point here which may give hope. You see: she might marry me
out of gratitude, because then I’d rid her of a certain man’s hatred. And
she’s afraid of that man.”
“Ah, you mean your father? And what, does he love her very much?”
Lambert suddenly roused himself with extraordinary curiosity.
“Oh, no!” I cried. “And how frightening you are, and at the same time
how stupid, Lambert! I mean, if he was in love with her, how could I want
to marry her? After all, a son and a father—that would be shameful. It’s
mama he loves, mama, and I saw him embrace her, and before that I myself
thought he loved Katerina Nikolaevna, but now I know clearly that he
maybe loved her once, but for a long time now he’s hated her . . . and
wanted revenge, and she’s afraid, because, I’ll tell you, Lambert, he’s
terribly frightening once he starts on revenge. He almost turns into a
madman. When he’s angry with her, he can go to any lengths. It’s an enmity
of the old kind over lofty principles. In our time we spit on all general
principles; in our time it’s not general principles, it’s only special cases. Ah,
Lambert, you understand nothing, you’re as stupid as my big toe: I’m
talking to you about these principles, but you surely understand none of it.
You’re terribly uneducated. Do you remember beating me? I’m now
stronger than you—do you know that?”
“Arkashka, let’s go to my place! We’ll spend the evening and drink
another bottle, and Alphonsine will play the guitar and sing.”
“No, I won’t go. Listen, Lambert, I have an ‘idea.’ If things don’t work
out and I don’t get married, then I’ll go into my idea; but you have no idea.”
“All right, all right, you’ll tell me, let’s go.”
“I’m not going!” I got up. “I don’t want to and I won’t. I’ll come to see
you, but you’re a scoundrel. I’ll give you the thirty thousand—so be it, but
I’m purer and higher than you . . . I can see that you want to deceive me in
everything. And about her I even forbid you to think: she’s higher than
everyone, and your plans are so base that I’m even surprised at you,
Lambert. I want to get married—that’s another matter, but I don’t need

capital, I despise capital. If she gives me her capital on her knees, I won’t
take it . . . But getting married, getting married, that’s—another matter. And
you know, you said it well about keeping her in a tight fist. To love, to love
passionately, with all a man’s magnanimity, which can never be found in a
woman, but also to be despotic—that’s a good thing. Because, Lambert, you
know what—women love despotism. You know women, Lambert. But
you’re astonishingly stupid in everything else. And, you know, Lambert,
you’re not at all as vile as you seem, you’re—simple. I like you. Ah,
Lambert, why are you such a knave? Otherwise we could live so merrily!
You know, Trishatov’s a dear man.”
I babbled these last incoherent phrases when we were already in the
street. Oh, I’m recalling it all in detail, to let the reader see that, for all my
raptures and for all my vows and promises to be regenerated for the better
and to seek seemliness, I could fall so easily then, and into such mire! And I
swear, if I weren’t fully and completely certain that I’m not at all like that
now and that I have developed my character through practical life, I would
not have confessed all this to the reader for anything.
We came out of the shop, and Lambert supported me, putting his arm
lightly around me. Suddenly I looked at him and saw almost the same
expression in his eyes—intent, scrutinizing, terribly attentive, and at the
same time sober in the highest degree—as on that morning when I was
freezing and he led me to a cab, with his arm around me in exactly the same
way, and listened, all ears and eyes, to my incoherent babble. People who
are getting drunk, but are not quite drunk yet, can suddenly have moments
of the fullest sobriety.
“I won’t go to your place for anything!” I uttered firmly and coherently,
looking at him mockingly and pushing him away with my hand.
“Ah, come on, I’ll tell Alphonsine to make tea, come on!”
He was terribly certain that I wouldn’t escape; he held and supported me
with relish, like a dear little victim, and I, of course, was just what he

needed, precisely that evening and in that condition! Why—will be
explained later.
“I’m not going!” I repeated. “Cabbie!”
Just then a cab came trotting up, and I hopped into the sledge.
“Where are you going? What’s with you?” yelled Lambert, in terrible
alarm, seizing my fur coat.
“And don’t you dare follow me,” I cried, “don’t try to overtake me!” At
that moment the cab started, and my coat was torn from Lambert’s hand.
“You’ll come anyway!” he shouted after me in an angry voice.
“I’ll come if I want to—by my own will!” I turned to him from the
sledge.

II
HE DIDN’T PURSUE ME, of course, because there happened to be no
other cab at hand, and I managed to disappear from his sight. I drove only
as far as the Haymarket, and there I got out and dismissed the sledge. I
wanted terribly to go by foot. I felt no fatigue, no great drunkenness, but
was just full of vigor; there was an influx of strength, there was an
extraordinary ability for any undertaking, and an endless number of
pleasant thoughts in my head.
My heart was pounding intensely and distinctly—I could hear each beat.
And everything seemed so nice to me, everything was so easy. Walking past
the guardhouse on the Haymarket, I wanted terribly to go up to the sentry
and kiss him. There was a thaw, the square turned black and smelly, but the
square, too, I liked very much.
“I’ll go to Obukhovsky Prospect now,” I thought, “then turn left and
come out in the Semyonovsky quarter, I’ll make a detour, it’s excellent, it’s
all excellent. My fur coat’s unbuttoned—why doesn’t anybody take it off

me, where are the thieves? They say there are thieves in the Haymarket, let
them come, maybe I’ll give them my fur coat. What do I need a fur coat
for? A fur coat is property. La propriété, c’est le vol.9229 But anyhow, what
nonsense, and how good everything is. It’s good that there’s a thaw. Why
frost? There’s no need at all for frost. It’s also good to talk nonsense. What
was it I said to Lambert about principles? I said there are no general
principles, but only special cases. That’s nonsense, that’s arch-nonsense! I
said it on purpose, to show off. It’s a bit shameful, but anyhow—never
mind, I’ll smooth it over. Don’t be ashamed, don’t torment yourself, Arkady
Makarovich. Arkady Makarovich, I like you. I even like you very much, my
young friend. It’s too bad you’re a little knave . . . and . . . and . . . ah, yes . .
. ah!”
I suddenly stopped, and again my whole heart was wrung in ecstasy:
“Lord! What was it he said? He said she loves me. Oh, he’s a crook, he
told a lot of lies here; it was so that I’d go and spend the night with him. But
maybe not. He said Anna Andreevna thought so, too . . . Bah! Nastasya
Egorovna could also find out a thing or two here: she pokes around
everywhere. And why didn’t I go to his place? I’d learn everything. Hm!
he’s got a plan, and I anticipated it all to the last stroke. A dream. It’s
broadly conceived, Mr. Lambert, only you’re wrong, it won’t be that way.
But maybe it will! Maybe it will! And can he really get me married? But
maybe he can. He’s naïve and credulous. He’s stupid and impudent, like all
practical people. Stupidity and impudence, joined together, are a great
force. And confess that you were in fact afraid of Lambert, Arkady
Makarovich! What does he need honest people for? He says it so seriously:
there’s not one honest man here! And you yourself—who are you? Eh,
never mind me! Don’t scoundrels need honest people? In knavery, honest
people are more needed than anywhere else. Ha, ha! You’re the only one
who didn’t know that before, Arkady Makarovich, with your total
innocence. Lord! What if he really gets me married!”
I paused again. Here I must confess one stupidity (since it happened so
long ago), I must confess that I had already wanted to marry long before—
that is, I didn’t want to and it would never have happened (and it won’t in

the future, I give my word), but already more than once and long before
then I had dreamed of how nice it would be to get married—that is, terribly
many times, especially on going to sleep each night. This began with me
when I was almost sixteen. I had a schoolmate, Lavrovsky, the same age as
me—such a nice, quiet, pretty boy, though not distinguished in any way. I
hardly ever spoke to him. Suddenly one day we were sitting next to each
other alone, and he was very pensive, and suddenly he says to me, “Ah,
Dolgoruky, what do you think about getting married now? Really, when
should one get married if not now? Now would be the very best time, and
yet it’s quite impossible!” And he said it so candidly. And I suddenly agreed
with him wholeheartedly, because I myself had dreamed of something like
it. Then we came together for several days in a row and kept talking about
it, as if in secret, though only about that. And then, I don’t know how it
happened, but we drifted apart and stopped talking. But ever since then I
began to dream. This, of course, would not be worth recalling, but I only
wanted to show how far back these things can sometimes go . . .
“There’s only one serious objection here,” I went on dreaming as I
walked. “Oh, of course, the insignificant difference in age would be no
obstacle, but there’s this: she’s such an aristocrat, and I’m—simply
Dolgoruky! Awfully nasty! Hm! Surely Versilov, once he’s married my
mother, could ask the authorities for permission to adopt me . . . for the
father’s services, so to speak . . . He was in the service, so of course there
were services; he was an arbiter of the peace . . . Oh, devil take it, what
vileness!”
I suddenly exclaimed that and suddenly stopped for the third time, but
now as if squashed on the spot. All the painful feeling of humiliation from
the consciousness that I could wish for such a disgrace as a change of name
through adoption, this betrayal of my whole childhood—all this in almost
one instant destroyed my whole previous mood, and all my joy vanished
like smoke. “No, I won’t tell this to anyone,” I thought, blushing terribly. “I
stooped so low because I’m . . . in love and stupid. No, if Lambert is right
about anything, it’s that nowadays all this foolishness is simply not
required, and that the main thing in our age is the man himself, and then his
money. That is, not his money, but his power. With my capital I’ll throw

myself into the ‘idea,’ and in ten years all Russia will be talking, and I’ll
have my revenge on everyone. And there’s no need to be ceremonious with
her, here again Lambert is right. She’ll turn coward and simply marry me.
In the simplest and most banal way, she’ll accept and marry me. ‘You don’t
know, you don’t know in what sort of back room it went on!’” Lambert’s
words came to my mind. “And that’s so,” I confirmed, “Lambert is right in
everything, a thousand times righter than I, and Versilov, and all these
idealists! He’s a realist. She’ll see that I have character and say, ‘Ah, he has
character!’ Lambert is a scoundrel, and all he wants is to fleece me of thirty
thousand, and yet he’s the only friend I’ve got. There is no other friendship
and cannot be, that was all invented by impractical people. And I don’t even
humiliate her; do I humiliate her? Not a bit: women are all like that! Can
there be a woman without meanness? That’s why she needs to have man
over her, that’s why she was created a subordinate being. Woman is vice
and temptation, and man is nobility and magnanimity. And so it will be unto
ages of ages. And never mind that I’m preparing to use the ‘document.’
That won’t prevent either nobility or magnanimity. Schillers in a pure form
don’t exist—they’ve been invented. Never mind a little dirt, if the goal is
splendid! Afterwards it will all be washed away, smoothed over. And now
it’s only—breadth, it’s only—life, it’s only—life’s truth—that’s what they
call it now!”
Oh, again I repeat: may I be forgiven for citing to the last line all this
drunken raving from that time. Of course, this is only the essence of my
thoughts from that time, but I believe I did speak in those very words. I had
to cite them, because I sat down to write in order to judge myself. And what
am I to judge, if not that? Can there be anything more serious in life? Wine
is no justification. In vino veritas.93
Dreaming thus and all buried in fantasy, I didn’t notice that I had finally
reached home, that is, mama’s apartment. I didn’t even notice how I entered
the apartment; but as soon as I stepped into our tiny front hall, I understood
at once that something extraordinary had happened. In the rooms they were
talking loudly, exclaiming, and mama could be heard weeping. In the
doorway I was almost knocked off my feet by Lukerya, who ran swiftly

from Makar Ivanovich’s room to the kitchen. I threw off my coat and went
into Makar Ivanovich’s room, because everyone was crowded there.
There stood Versilov and mama. Mama lay in his arms, and he pressed
her tightly to his heart. Makar Ivanovich was sitting, as usual, on his little
bench, but as if in some sort of strengthlessness, so that Liza had to support
him by the shoulders with her arms to keep him from falling; and it was
even obvious that he was all leaning over so as to fall. I swiftly stepped
closer, gave a start, and realized that the old man was dead.
He had only just died, about a minute before my arrival. Ten minutes
earlier he had felt as much himself as ever. Only Liza was with him; she
was sitting with him and telling him about her grief, and he was stroking
her hair as the day before. Suddenly he trembled all over (Liza told us),
made as if to stand up, made as if to cry out, and silently began to fall
towards the left. “Heart failure!” said Versilov. Liza cried out for the whole
house to hear, and it was then that they came running—all that about a
minute before my arrival.
“Arkady!” Versilov shouted to me. “Run instantly to Tatyana Pavlovna’s.
She should certainly be at home. Ask her to come at once. Take a cab.
Quickly, I beg you!”
His eyes were flashing—I remember that clearly. I didn’t notice in his
face anything like pure pity, tears—only mama, Liza, and Lukerya were
weeping. On the contrary, and this I recall very well, what was striking in
his face was some extraordinary excitement, almost ecstasy. I ran for
Tatyana Pavlovna.
The way, as is known from the foregoing, wasn’t long. I didn’t take a
cab, but ran all the way without stopping. There was confusion in my mind,
and also even almost something ecstatic. I realized that a radical event had
happened. The drunkenness had disappeared completely in me, to the last
drop, and along with it all ignoble thoughts, by the time I rang at Tatyana
Pavlovna’s.

The Finnish woman unlocked the door: “Not at home!” and wanted to
lock it at once.
“What do you mean, not at home?” I burst into the front hall by force. “It
can’t be! Makar Ivanovich is dead!”
“Wha-a-at?” Tatyana Pavlovna’s cry suddenly rang out through the
closed door of her drawing room.
“Dead! Makar Ivanovich is dead! Andrei Petrovich asks you to come this
minute.”
“No, you’re lying! . . .”
The latch clicked, but the door opened only an inch: “What is it, tell me!”
“I don’t know myself, I just arrived and he was already dead. Andrei
Petrovich says it’s heart failure!”
“At once, this minute. Run, tell them I’ll be there. Go on, go on, go on!
Well, what are you standing there for?”
But I saw clearly through the half-opened door that someone had come
out from behind the curtain that screened Tatyana Pavlovna’s bed and was
standing there in the room behind Tatyana Pavlovna. Mechanically,
instinctively, I seized the latch and would not let her close the door.
“Arkady Makarovich! Is it really true that he’s dead?” the familiar, soft,
smooth, metallic voice rang out, at which everything began to tremble in
my soul all at once: in the question something could be heard that had
penetrated and stirred her soul.
“In that case,” Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly abandoned the door, “in that
case—settle it between you as you like. You want it that way!”
She rushed impetuously out of the apartment, putting on her kerchief and
coat as she ran, and started down the stairs. We were left alone. I threw off

my coat, stepped in, and closed the door behind me. She stood before me as
she had when we met the other time, with a bright face, a bright gaze, and,
as then, reached both hands out to me. As if cut down, I literally fell at her
feet.

III
I WAS BEGINNING to weep, I don’t know why; I don’t remember how
she sat me down beside her, I only remember, in a memory that is priceless
for me, how we sat next to each other, hand in hand, and talked
impetuously: she was asking about the old man and his death, and I was
telling her about him—so that one might have thought I was weeping over
Makar Ivanovich, whereas that would have been the height of absurdity;
and I know that she could never have supposed in me such a thoroughly
childish banality. At last I suddenly recollected myself and felt ashamed.
Now I suppose that I wept then solely out of ecstasy, and I think she
understood it very well herself, so that with regard to this memory I’m at
peace.
It suddenly seemed very strange to me that she should keep asking like
that about Makar Ivanovich.
“Did you know him?” I asked in surprise.
“For a long time. I’ve never seen him, but he has played a role in my life,
too. At one time the man I’m afraid of told me a great deal about him. You
know who that man is.”
“I only know now that ‘the man’ was much nearer to your soul than you
revealed to me before,” I said, not knowing myself what I meant to express
by it, but as if in reproach and frowning deeply.
“You say he was kissing your mother just now? Embracing her? You saw
it yourself ?” she went on asking without listening to me.
“Yes, I saw it; and, believe me, it was all sincere and magnanimous in the
highest degree!” I hastened to confirm, seeing her joy.

“God grant it!” She crossed herself. “Now he’s unbound. That beautiful
old man only bound his life. With his death, duty and . . . dignity will
resurrect in him again, as they already resurrected once. Oh, he’s
magnanimous before all else, he’ll give peace to the heart of your mother,
whom he loves more than anything on earth, and he himself will finally be
at peace, and thank God—it’s high time.”
“Is he very dear to you?”
“Yes, very dear, though not in the sense in which he himself would wish
and in which you’re asking.”
“So are you afraid now for him or for yourself ?” I asked suddenly.
“Well, these are intricate questions, let’s drop them.”
“Let’s drop them, of course; only I was ignorant of that, all too much so,
maybe; but let it be, you’re right, everything’s new now, and if anyone is
resurrected, it’s me first of all. I’ve been mean in my thoughts before you,
Katerina Nikolaevna, and maybe no more than an hour ago I committed a
meanness against you in deed as well, but you know, here I am sitting next
to you, and I feel no remorse. Because everything has vanished now, and
everything is new, and that man who was plotting a meanness against you
an hour ago, I don’t know and do not want to know!”
“Come to your senses,” she smiled, “it’s as if you’re slightly delirious.”
“And how can a man possibly judge himself sitting next to you,” I went
on, “whether he’s honest or mean? You’re like the sun, unattainable . . . Tell
me, how could you come out to me after all that’s happened? If you knew
what happened an hour ago, only an hour? What sort of dream was coming
true?”
“I probably know everything,” she smiled gently. “You wanted to take
revenge on me for something just now, swore to ruin me, and certainly
would have killed or beaten anyone who uttered even one bad word about
me in your presence.”

Oh, she was smiling and joking; but it was only from her immeasurable
kindness, because her whole soul was filled at that moment, as I later
realized, with such enormous care of her own and such strong and powerful
feeling, that she could talk with me and answer my trifling, irksome
questions only as one answers a little boy who has asked some importunate,
childish question, in order to get rid of him. I suddenly understood that and
felt ashamed, but I was no longer able to stop.
“No,” I cried, losing control of myself, “no, I didn’t kill the one who
spoke badly of you, but, on the contrary, I even seconded him!”
“Oh, for God’s sake, don’t, there’s no need, don’t tell me anything,” she
suddenly reached her hand out to stop me, and even with a sort of suffering
in her face, but I had already jumped up from my seat and stood before her
in order to speak everything out, and if I had spoken it out, what happened
later wouldn’t have happened, because it would certainly have ended with
my confessing everything and returning the document to her. But she
suddenly laughed:
“Don’t, don’t say anything, no details! I know all your crimes myself. I’ll
bet you wanted to marry me or something like that, and were just talking it
over with one of your accomplices, a former schoolmate of yours . . . Ah, it
seems I’ve guessed right!” she cried, peering gravely into my face.
“How . . . how could you guess?” I stammered like a fool, terribly struck.
“Well, what else! But enough, enough! I forgive you, only stop talking
about it,” she waved her hand again, now with visible impatience. “I’m a
dreamer myself, and if you knew what means I resort to in my dreams when
nothing holds me back! Enough, you keep confusing me. I’m very glad that
Tatyana Pavlovna left; I wanted very much to see you, and with her here it
would be impossible to speak as we’re doing now. It seems I’m guilty
before you for what happened then. Right? Am I right?”
“You, guilty? But I betrayed you to him then and—what can you have
thought of me! I’ve been thinking about that all this time, all these days,

ever since then, every moment, thinking and feeling.” (I wasn’t lying to
her.)
“You needn’t have tormented yourself so much, I understood only too
well then how it all happened; you simply blurted out to him in joy that you
were in love with me and that I . . . well, that I had listened to you. That’s
twenty years old for you. You do love him more than anything in the world,
you’re looking for a friend, an ideal in him? I understood that only too well,
but it was too late. Oh, yes, I was the guilty one then: I should have sent for
you right then and put you at ease, but I was vexed; and I requested that you
not be received in the house; and what came of it was that scene at the front
door, and then that night. And you know, all this time, just like you, I’ve
dreamed of meeting you secretly, only I didn’t know how to arrange it. And
what do you think I feared most? That you would believe his slander
against me.”
“Never!” I cried.
“I value our former meetings; your youth is dear to me, and even,
perhaps, this sincerity itself . . . For I’m a most serious character. I’m the
most serious and scowling character of all modern women, know that . . .
ha, ha, ha! We’ll talk our fill some other time, but now I’m a bit out of sorts,
I’m agitated and . . . it seems I’m in hysterics. But at last, at last, he will let
me live in the world, too!”
This exclamation escaped involuntarily; I understood that at once and
didn’t want to pick it up, but I trembled all over.
“He knows I’ve forgiven him!” she suddenly exclaimed again, as if to
herself.
“Could you really have forgiven him that letter? And how can he know
that you’ve forgiven him?” I exclaimed, no longer restraining myself.
“How does he know? Oh, he knows,” she went on answering me, but
looked as if she had forgotten me and was talking to herself. “He’s come to

his senses now. And how could he not know I’ve forgiven him, since he
knows my soul by heart? He knows I’m somewhat of the same sort as he.”
“You?”
“Well, yes, he’s aware of that. Oh, I’m not passionate, I’m calm: but, like
him, I also want everybody to be good . . . He does love me for something
after all.”
“Then how is it he said you have all the vices?”
“He just said that; he’s keeping another secret to himself. And isn’t it true
that the way he wrote his letter is terribly funny?”
“Funny?” (I was listening to her with all my might; I suppose she really
was as if in hysterics and . . . maybe wasn’t speaking for me at all; but I
couldn’t keep myself from asking.)
“Oh, yes, funny, and how I’d laugh if . . . if I wasn’t afraid. Though I’m
not such a coward, don’t think it; but on account of that letter I didn’t sleep
all that night, it’s written as if with some sort of sick blood . . . and after
such a letter, what’s left? I love life, I’m terribly afraid for my life, I’m
terribly pusillanimous about it . . . Ah, listen!” she suddenly roused herself.
“Go to him! He’s alone now, he can’t be there all the time, he must have
gone somewhere alone. Find him quickly, you must, run to him quickly,
show him you’re his loving son, prove to him that you’re a dear, kind boy,
my student, whom I . . . Oh, God grant you happiness! I don’t love anyone,
and it’s better that way, but I wish everyone happiness, everyone, and him
first, and let him know of it . . . even right now, I’d be very pleased . . .”
She got up and suddenly disappeared behind the portière; tears glistened
on her cheeks at that moment (hysterical, after laughing). I remained alone,
agitated and confused. I positively did not know to what to ascribe such
agitation in her, which I could never have supposed in her. It was as if
something contracted in my heart.

I waited five minutes, and finally ten; I was suddenly struck by the
profound silence, and I ventured to peek through the door and call out. At
my call, Marya appeared and declared to me in the most calm voice that the
lady had long since dressed and gone out by the back door.

Chapter Seven
I
THAT WAS ALL I needed. I grabbed my fur coat and, putting it on as I
went, ran outside, thinking, “She told me to go to him, but where am I
going to get him?”
But, apart from everything else, I was struck by the question, “Why does
she think something’s come now and he will give her peace? Of course,
because he’s going to marry mama, but what about her? Is she glad that he’s
marrying mama, or, on the contrary, is that what makes her unhappy? Is that
why she’s in hysterics? Why can’t I resolve this?”
I note this second thought that flashed in me then literally, as a reminder:
it’s important. That evening was fateful. And here, perhaps, against one’s
will, one comes to believe in predestination: I hadn’t gone a hundred steps
in the direction of mama’s apartment, when I suddenly ran into the man I
was looking for. He seized my shoulder and stopped me.
“It’s you!” he cried joyfully and at the same time as if in the greatest
astonishment. “Imagine, I went to your place,” he spoke quickly, “looking
for you, asking for you—you’re the only one I need now in the whole
universe! Your official told me God knows what lies; but you weren’t at
home, and I left, even forgetting to ask him to tell you to run to me at once
—and what then? I was going along in the unshakable conviction that fate
couldn’t help sending you now, when I need you most, and here you’re the
first one I meet! Let’s go to my place. You’ve never been to my place.”
In short, the two of us had been looking for each other, and something
similar, as it were, had happened to each of us. We walked on, hurrying
very much.

On the way he just uttered a few short phrases about having left mama
with Tatyana Pavlovna, and so on. He led me, holding on to my arm. He
lived not far away, and we got there quickly. I had, in fact, never been to his
place. It was a small apartment of three rooms, which he rented (or, more
correctly, Tatyana Pavlovna rented) solely for that “nursing baby.” This
apartment had always been under Tatyana Pavlovna’s supervision, and was
inhabited by a nanny with the baby (and now also by Nastasya Egorovna);
but there had always been a room for Versilov as well—namely, the very
first one, by the front door, rather spacious and rather well and plushly
furnished, a sort of study for bookish and scribal occupations. In fact, there
were many books on the table, in the bookcase, and on the shelves (while at
mama’s there were almost none at all); there were pages covered with
writing, there were tied-up bundles of letters—in short, it all had the look of
a corner long lived in, and I know that, before as well, Versilov had
sometimes (though rather rarely) moved to this apartment altogether and
stayed in it even for weeks at a time. The first thing that caught my
attention was a portrait of mama that hung over the desk, in a magnificent
carved frame of costly wood—a photograph, taken abroad, of course, and,
judging by its extraordinary size, a very costly thing. I hadn’t known and
had never heard of this portrait before, and the main thing that struck me
was the extraordinary likeness in the photograph, a spiritual likeness, so to
speak—in short, as if it was a real portrait by an artist’s hand, and not a
mechanical print. As soon as I came in, I stopped involuntarily before it.
“Isn’t it? Isn’t it?” Versilov suddenly repeated over me.
That is, “Isn’t it just like her?” I turned to look at him and was struck by
the expression of his face. He was somewhat pale, but with an ardent,
intense gaze, as if radiant with happiness and strength. I had never known
him to have such an expression.
“I didn’t know you loved mama so much!” I suddenly blurted out, in
rapture myself.
He smiled blissfully, though there was a reflection as if of some suffering
in his smile, or, better, of something humane, lofty . . . I don’t know how to

say it; but highly developed people, it seems to me, cannot have triumphant
and victoriously happy faces. Without answering me, he took the portrait
from the rings with both hands, brought it close, kissed it, then quietly hung
it back on the wall.
“Notice,” he said, “it’s extremely rare that photographic copies bear any
resemblance, and that’s understandable: it’s extremely rare that the original
itself, that is, each of us, happens to resemble itself. Only in rare moments
does a human face express its main feature, its most characteristic thought.
An artist studies a face and divines its main thought, though at the moment
of painting it might be absent from the face. A photograph finds the man as
he is, and it’s quite possible that Napoleon, at some moment, would come
out stupid, and Bismarck tenderhearted. But here, in this portrait, the sun, as
if on purpose, found Sonya in her main moment—of modest, meek love and
her somewhat wild, timorous chastity. And how happy she was then, when
she was finally convinced that I was so eager to have her portrait! This
picture was taken not so long ago, but all the same she was younger and
better looking then; though there were already those sunken cheeks, those
little wrinkles on her forehead, that timorous shyness in her eyes, which
seems to be increasing in her more and more with the years. Would you
believe it, my dear? I can hardly imagine her now with a different face, and
yet once she was young and lovely! Russian women lose their looks
quickly, their beauty is fleeting, and in truth that’s not only owing to the
ethnographic properties of the type, but also to the fact that they’re capable
of loving unreservedly. A Russian woman gives everything at once if she
loves—moment and destiny, present and future. They don’t know how to
economize, they don’t lay anything aside, and their beauty quickly goes into
the one they love. Those sunken cheeks—that is also a beauty gone into me,
into my brief bit of fun. You’re glad I loved your mother, and maybe you
didn’t even believe I loved her? Yes, my friend, I loved her very much, yet I
did her nothing but harm . . . There’s another portrait here—look at it as
well.”
He took it from the desk and handed it to me. It was also a photograph, of
an incomparably smaller size, in a slender oval wooden border—the face of
a girl, thin and consumptive and, for all that, beautiful; pensive and at the

same time strangely devoid of thought. Regular features, of a type fostered
over generations, yet leaving a painful impression: it looked as though this
being had suddenly been possessed by some fixed idea, tormenting
precisely because it was beyond this being’s strength.
“This . . . this is the girl you wanted to marry there and who died of
consumption . . . her stepdaughter?” I said somewhat timidly.
“Yes, wanted to marry, died of consumption, her stepdaughter. I knew
you knew . . . all that gossip. However, apart from gossip, you couldn’t
have known anything here. Let the portrait be, my friend, this is a poor
madwoman and nothing more.”
“Quite mad?”
“Or else an idiot. However, I think she was mad as well. She had a child
by Prince Sergei Petrovich (out of madness, not out of love; that was one of
Sergei Petrovich’s meanest acts); the child is here now, in the other room,
I’ve long wanted to show it to you. Prince Sergei Petrovich didn’t dare to
come here and look at the baby; I made that stipulation with him while we
were still abroad. I took it under my care with your mama’s permission.
With your mama’s permission I also wanted then to marry that . . .
unfortunate woman . . .”
“Was such permission possible?” I uttered hotly.
“Oh, yes! she gave it to me. One gets jealous of a woman, and that was
not a woman.”
“Not a woman for anybody except mama! Never in my life will I believe
that mama wasn’t jealous!” I cried.
“And you’re right. I realized it only when it was all over—that is, when
she had given her permission. But let’s drop it. The affair didn’t work out
on account of Lydia’s death, and maybe it wouldn’t have worked out even if
she had remained alive, but even now I don’t let mama see the child. It was
merely an episode. My dear, I’ve long been waiting for you to come here.

I’ve long been dreaming of how we’d get together here. Do you know how
long? For two years now.”
He looked at me sincerely and truthfully, with an unreserved warmth of
heart. I seized his hand:
“Why were you so slow, why didn’t you invite me long ago? If you knew
what has happened . . . and what wouldn’t have happened if you had called
me long ago! . . .”
At that moment the samovar was brought in, and Nastasya Egorovna
suddenly brought in the baby, asleep.
“Look at him,” said Versilov. “I love him, and I had him brought now on
purpose, so that you could also look at him. Well, take him away again,
Nastasya Egorovna. Sit down to the samovar. I’m going to imagine that
we’ve lived like this forever and have come together every evening, never
parting. Let me look at you; sit like this, so that I can see your face! How I
love your face! How I kept imagining your face to myself, as I was waiting
for you to come from Moscow! You ask why I didn’t send for you long
ago? Wait, maybe now you’ll understand.”
“But can it be only this old man’s death that has loosened your tongue
now? It’s strange . . .”
But though I did say that, I still looked at him with love. We talked like
two friends in the highest and fullest sense of the word. He had brought me
here to explain, to recount, to justify something to me; and yet everything
was already explained and justified before any words. Whatever I was to
hear from him now, the result had already been achieved, and we both
happily knew it and looked at each other that way.
“It’s not exactly this old man’s death,” he replied, “not only his death;
there’s something else now that has hit on the same spot . . . May God bless
this moment and our life, for a long time to come! Let’s talk, my dear! I
keep getting broken up, diverted, I want to talk about one thing and get
sidetracked into a thousand other details. That always happens when one’s

heart is full . . . But let’s talk; the time has come, and I’ve long been in love
with you, my boy . . .”
He leaned back in his armchair and looked me over once more.
“How strange! How strange it is to hear that!” I repeated, drowning in
ecstasy.
And then, I remember, in his face there suddenly flashed the usual
wrinkle—as if of sadness and mockery together—which I knew so well. He
controlled himself and, as if with a certain strain, began.

II
“HERE’S THE THING, Arkady: if I had invited you earlier, what would I
have said to you? In this question lies my whole answer.”
“That is, you mean to say that you’re now mama’s husband and my
father, while then . . . You wouldn’t have known before what to say about
my social position? Is that it?”
“That’s not the only thing I wouldn’t have known what to say about, my
dear; there’s much here that I would have had to pass over in silence.
There’s even much here that’s ridiculous and humiliating, because it looks
like a trick—really, like a most farcical trick. Well, how could we have
understood each other before, if I understood myself only today, at five
o’clock in the afternoon, exactly two hours before Makar Ivanovich’s
death? You look at me with unpleasant perplexity? Don’t worry, I’ll explain
the trick; but what I said is quite right: life is all wanderings and
perplexities, and suddenly—the resolution, on such-and-such a day, at five
o’clock in the afternoon! It’s even offensive, isn’t it? In the still-recent old
days I’d have been quite offended.”
I was actually listening in painful perplexity; there was a strong presence
of the former Versilovian wrinkle, which I had no wish to encounter that
evening, after the words that had been spoken. Suddenly I exclaimed:

“My God! You got something from her . . . at five o’clock today?”
He looked at me intently and was evidently struck by my exclamation,
and maybe also by my saying “from her.”
“You’ll learn everything,” he said with a pensive smile, “and, of course, I
won’t conceal from you what you need to know, because that’s what I
brought you here for; but let’s set it aside for now. You see, my friend, I’ve
long known that we have children who brood about their families from
childhood on, who are outraged by the unseemliness of their fathers and
their surroundings. I noticed these brooders while I was still in school, and
concluded then that it was all because they became envious very early on.
Note, however, that I myself was one of these brooding children, but . . .
excuse me, my dear, I’m surprisingly distracted. I only wanted to say how
constantly I’ve been afraid for you here almost all this time. I always
imagined you as one of those little beings who are conscious of their
giftedness and given over to solitude. Like you, I also never cared for my
comrades. Woe to those beings who are left only to their own powers and
dreams, and with a passionate, all too premature, and almost vengeful
longing for seemliness—precisely ‘vengeful.’ But enough, my dear, I’m
digressing again . . . Even before I began to love you, I had already
imagined you and your solitary, wild dreams . . . But enough; in fact, I’ve
forgotten what I started to say. However, all that still had to be spoken out.
But before, before, what could I have said to you? Now I see your gaze
upon me and know that it’s my son looking at me; while even yesterday I
couldn’t have believed I’d ever be sitting and talking with my boy as I am
today.”
He was indeed becoming very distracted, but at the same time was as if
touched by something.
“Now I have no need for dreams and reveries, now you are enough for
me! I will follow you!” I said, giving myself to him with all my soul.
“Follow me? But my wanderings have just ended, and just today as it
happens. You’re too late, my dear. Today is the finale of the last act, and the

curtain is coming down. This last act dragged on for a long time. It began
very long ago—when I fled abroad for the last time. I abandoned everything
then, and know, my dear, that I unmarried your mother then, and told her so
myself. You should know that. I explained to her then that I was going away
forever, and that she would never see me again. Worst of all, I even forgot
to leave her any money then. Nor did I think of you for a minute. I left with
the intention of remaining in Europe, my dear, and never coming home. I
emigrated.”
“To Herzen?30 To take part in foreign propaganda? You’ve probably
taken part in some conspiracy all your life?” I cried, not restraining myself.
“No, my friend, I never took part in any conspiracy. But your eyes are
even flashing; I like your exclamations, my dear. No, I simply left then
from yearning. From a sudden yearning. This was the yearning of a Russian
nobleman—I truly can’t put it any better. A nobleman’s yearning—and
nothing more.”
“Serfdom . . . the emancipation of the people?”31 I murmured, breathless.
“Serfdom? You think I was yearning for serfdom? Couldn’t bear the
emancipation of the people? Oh, no, my friend, it was we who were the
emancipators. I emigrated without any spite. I had just been an arbiter of the
peace and had struggled with all my might; I had struggled disinterestedly,
and didn’t even leave because I had gotten too little reward for my
liberalism. None of us got anything then—that is, again, the ones like me. I
left rather in pride than in repentance, and, believe me, quite far from
thinking it was time to end my life as a humble bootmaker. Je suis
gentilhomme avant tout et je mourrai gentilhomme! 94 But even so I felt
sad. There are maybe about a thousand men of our sort in Russia; maybe no
more, in fact, but that’s quite enough for an idea not to die. We are the
bearers of an idea, my dear! . . . My friend, I’m talking in some strange
hope that you’ll understand all this gibberish. I invited you on a whim of
my heart: I’ve long been dreaming of how I might say something to you . . .
to you, precisely to you! But, anyhow . . . anyhow . . .”

“No, speak,” I cried, “I see sincerity in your face again . . . So what, did
Europe resurrect you then? And what was your ‘nobleman’s yearning’?
Forgive me, dear heart, I still don’t understand.”
“Did Europe resurrect me? But I myself was going then to bury her!”
“To bury her?” I repeated in surprise.
He smiled.
“Arkady, my friend, my soul has waxed tender now, and my spirit is
stirred. I’ll never forget my first moments in Europe that time. I had lived in
Europe before, but that was a special time, and I had never arrived there
with such inconsolable sadness and . . . such love as at that time. I’ll tell
you one of my first impressions then, one of the dreams I had then, an
actual dream. It was still in Germany. I had just left Dresden and, in my
absentmindedness, had missed the station at which I should have changed
direction and wound up on another branch line. They got me off at once; it
was past two in the afternoon, a bright day. It was a little German town.
They directed me to a hotel. I had to wait: the next train came through at
eleven o’clock at night. I was even pleased to have an adventure, because I
was in no particular hurry. I was wandering, my dear, just wandering. The
hotel turned out to be wretched and small, but it was all covered in greenery
and surrounded with beds of flowers, as always there. I was given a little
room and, as I had spent the whole night on the road, I fell asleep after
dinner, at four o’clock in the afternoon.
“I dreamed a dream that was completely unexpected for me, because I
had never had one like it. In Dresden, in the gallery, there’s a painting by
Claude Lorrain—Acis and Galatea32 according to the catalog, but I’ve
always called it The Golden Age, I don’t know why myself. I had seen it
before, and then, some three days earlier, I had noticed it once again in
passing. I saw this painting in my dream, but not as a painting, but as if it
were something happening. However, I don’t know precisely what I
dreamed; it was exactly as in the painting—a corner of the Greek
archipelago, and time, too, seemed to have shifted back three thousand

years; gentle blue waves, islands and rocks, a flowering coast, a magic
panorama in the distance, the inviting, setting sun—words can’t express it.
Here European mankind remembered its cradle, and the thought of it
seemed to fill my soul with a kindred love. This was the earthly paradise of
mankind: the gods came down from heaven and were united with people . .
. Oh, beautiful people lived here! They woke up and fell asleep happy and
innocent; the meadows and groves were filled with their songs and merry
shouts; a great surplus of untouched forces went into love and
simplehearted joy. The sun poured down warmth and light on them,
rejoicing over its beautiful children . . . A wonderful reverie, a lofty
delusion of mankind! The golden age—the most incredible dream of all that
have ever been, but for which people have given all their lives and all their
strength, for which prophets have died and been slain, without which the
peoples do not want to live and cannot even die! And it was as if I lived
through this whole feeling in my dream; the cliffs and the sea and the
slanting rays of the setting sun—it was as if I could still see it all when I
woke up and opened my eyes, literally wet with tears. I remember that I
was glad. A feeling of happiness unknown to me before went through my
heart, even to the point of pain; this was an all-human love. It was already
full evening; a sheaf of slanting rays came in the window of my little room,
breaking through the greenery of the plants on the windowsill, pouring its
light over me. And then, my friend, and then—this setting sun of the first
day of European mankind, which I had seen in my dream, turned for me as
soon as I woke up, in reality, into the setting sun of the last day of European
mankind! At that time especially it was as if a death knell could be heard
over Europe. I’m not just speaking of the war, or of the Tuileries;33 I knew
even without that that it would all pass away, the whole countenance of the
old European world—sooner or later; but as a Russian European I couldn’t
accept it. Yes, they had just burned the Tuileries then . . . Oh, don’t worry, I
know it was ‘logical,’ and I understand only too well the irresistibility of
the current idea, but as a bearer of the highest Russian cultural thought I
couldn’t accept it, because the highest Russian thought is the allreconciliation of ideas. And who in the whole world could understand such
a thought then? I wandered alone. I’m not talking about myself personally
—I’m talking about Russian thought. There, there was strife and logic;

there the Frenchman was only a Frenchman, and the German only a
German, and that with a greater intensity than at any time in their entire
history; meaning that a Frenchman never did more harm to France, or a
German to his Germany, than at that time! In the whole of Europe then
there wasn’t a single European! I alone among all those pétroleurs34 could
tell them to their faces that their Tuileries was a mistake, and I alone among
all the avenging conservatives could tell the avengers that the Tuileries,
though a crime, still had its logic. And that was so, my boy, because I alone,
as a Russian, was then the only European in Europe. I’m not talking about
myself—I’m talking about all of Russian thought. I wandered, my friend, I
wandered and knew firmly that I had to keep silent and wander. But still I
felt sad. My boy, I cannot help respecting my nobility. It seems you’re
laughing?”
“No, I’m not laughing,” I said in a deeply moved voice, “I’m not
laughing at all. You’ve shaken my heart with your vision of the golden age,
and be assured that I’m beginning to understand you. But most of all I’m
glad that you respect yourself so much. I hasten to tell you so. That’s
something I never expected of you!”
“I’ve already told you that I like your exclamations, my dear,” he smiled
again at my naïve exclamation and, getting up from his armchair, began
pacing the room without noticing it. I also got up. He went on speaking in
his strange language, but with deeply penetrating thought.

III
“YES, MY BOY, I repeat to you that I can’t help respecting my nobility.
Over the centuries we have developed a high cultural type never seen
before, which does not exist anywhere else in the world—the type of
universal suffering for all. It’s a Russian type, but since it’s taken from the
highest cultural stratum of the Russian people, that means I have the honor
of belonging to it. It preserves in itself the future of Russia. There are
perhaps only a thousand of us—maybe more, maybe less—but the whole of
Russia has lived up to now only to produce this thousand. Too few, they’ll

say, indignant that so many centuries and so many millions of people have
been spent for a thousand men. In my opinion, it’s not too few.”
I listened with strained attention. A conviction was emerging, the
tendency of a whole lifetime. This “thousand men” betrayed him in such
high relief! I felt that his expansiveness with me came from some external
shock. He made all these ardent speeches while loving me; but the reason
why he suddenly began speaking, and why he wished to speak this way
precisely with me, still remained unknown to me.
“I emigrated,” he went on, “and I didn’t regret anything I left behind. I
had served Russia then with all that was in my power, while I lived there;
having left, I also continued to serve her, but only expanded the idea. But
serving her in that way, I served her far more than if I had been merely a
Russian, as a Frenchman then was merely a Frenchman, and a German a
German. In Europe that has not yet been understood. Europe created noble
types of the Frenchman, the Englishman, the German, but of her future man
she still knows almost nothing. And it seems she doesn’t want to know yet.
And that’s understandable: they’re not free, and we are free. I, with my
Russian yearning, was the only free man in Europe then.
“Make note of a strange thing, my friend: any Frenchman can serve not
only his France, but even mankind, solely on condition that he remains
most of all a Frenchman; the same applies to the Englishman and the
German. Only the Russian, even in our time, that is, long before the general
summing up, is capable of becoming most Russian precisely only when he
is most European. That is our most essential national distinction from all the
rest, and in this respect Russia is like nowhere else. In France I’m a
Frenchman, with a German I’m a German, with an ancient Greek a Greek,
and by that very fact I’m most Russian. By that very fact I am a real
Russian, and I serve Russia most, for I put forward her chief thought. I am a
pioneer of that thought. I emigrated then, but did I leave Russia? No, I
continued to serve her. Granted, I did nothing in Europe; granted, I went
only to wander (and I knew I went only to wander), but it was enough that I
went with my thought and my consciousness. I took my Russian yearning
there. Oh, it wasn’t only the blood of that time that alarmed me so much,

and not even the Tuileries, but all that was bound to follow. They’re
doomed to go on fighting for a long time, because they’re still all too
German and all too French, and they haven’t finished their work in those
roles. But I regret the destruction on the way. For a Russian, Europe is as
precious as Russia; for him, every stone in her is dear and beloved. Europe
was just as much our fatherland as Russia. Oh, even more! It’s impossible
to love Russia more than I do, but I never reproached myself for the fact
that Venice, Rome, Paris, the treasures of their science and art, their whole
history—are dearer to me than Russia. Oh, Russians cherish those old
foreign stones, those wonders of God’s old world, those fragments of holy
wonders; and they’re even dearer to us than to them! They have other
thoughts and other feelings now, and they’ve ceased to cherish the old
stones . . . A conservative there merely struggles for existence; and the
pétroleur acts up only over the right to a crust of bread. Russia alone lives
not for herself, but for thought, and you must agree, my friend, with the
portentous fact that, for almost a hundred years, Russia has lived decidedly
not for herself, but for Europe alone! And they? Oh, they are doomed to
terrible torments before they reach the Kingdom of God.”
I confess, I listened in great confusion; even the tone of his speech
alarmed me, though I couldn’t help being struck by the thoughts. I had a
morbid fear of falseness. Suddenly I remarked to him in a stern voice:
“You just said ‘the Kingdom of God.’ I’ve heard you preached God there,
and wore chains?”
“Let my chains be,” he smiled, “that’s something else entirely. I was not
yet preaching anything then, but I was yearning for their God—that’s true.
They proclaimed atheism then . . . a small bunch of them, but that makes no
difference; these were only the front-runners, but this was their first
executive step—that’s the important thing. Here again it’s their logic; but
there is always anguish in logic. I was of a different culture, and my heart
couldn’t accept it. The ingratitude with which they parted with the idea, the
whistling and mudslinging were unbearable to me. The bootishness of the
process alarmed me. However, reality always smacks of the boot, even with
the brightest striving towards the ideal, and I, of course, should have known

that. But even so, I was a man of a different type: I was free in choosing,
but they were not—and I wept, wept for them, wept over the old idea, and
maybe wept real tears, without any pretty words.”
“You believed so strongly in God?” I asked mistrustfully.
“My friend, that question is perhaps superfluous. Let’s suppose I didn’t
believe very much, but still I couldn’t help yearning for the idea. I couldn’t
help imagining to myself at times how man was going to live without God
and whether it would ever be possible. My heart always decided it was
impossible; but a certain period was perhaps possible . . . For me, there is
even no doubt that it will come; but here I’ve always imagined another
picture to myself . . .”
“Which?”
True, he had said earlier that he was happy; of course, there was a good
deal of rapturousness in his words; that is how I take much of what he said
then. Without doubt, respecting this man as I do, I will not venture now to
set down on paper all that we talked about then; but I will present here
several strokes from the strange picture I managed to coax out of him.
Above all, always and all the time before then, I had been tormented by
these “chains,” and I wanted to clear them up—that was why I persisted.
Several fantastic and extremely strange ideas that he uttered then have
remained in my heart forever.
“I imagine to myself, my dear,” he began with a pensive smile, “that the
battle is over and the fighting has subsided. After the curses, the
mudslinging and whistling, a calm has come, and people are left alone, as
they wished: the great former idea has left them; the great source of strength
that had nourished and warmed them till then is departing, like that
majestic, inviting sun in Claude Lorrain’s painting, but it already seemed
like the last day of mankind. And people suddenly realized that they
remained quite alone, and at once felt a great orphancy. My dear boy, I’ve
never been able to imagine people ungrateful and grown stupid. The
orphaned people would at once begin pressing together more closely and

lovingly; they would hold hands, understanding that they alone were now
everything for each other. The great idea of immortality would disappear
and would have to be replaced; and all the great abundance of the former
love for the one who was himself immortality, would be turned in all of
them to nature, to the world, to people, to every blade of grass. They would
love the earth and life irrepressibly and in the measure to which they
gradually became aware of their transient and finite state, and it would be
with a special love now, not as formerly. They would begin to observe and
discover such phenomena and secrets in nature as they had never supposed
before, because they would look at nature with new eyes, the eyes with
which a lover looks at his beloved. They would wake up and hasten to kiss
each other, hurrying to love, conscious that the days were short, and that
that was all they had left. They would work for each other, and each would
give all he had to everyone, and would be happy in that alone. Every child
would know and feel that each person on earth was like a father and mother
to him. ‘Tomorrow may be my last day,’ each of them would think, looking
at the setting sun, ‘but all the same, though I die, they will all remain, and
their children after them’—and this thought that they would remain, loving
and trembling for each other in the same way, would replace the thought of
a meeting beyond the grave. Oh, they would hasten to love, in order to
extinguish the great sadness in their hearts. They would be proud and brave
for themselves, but would become timorous for one another. Each would
tremble for the life and happiness of each. They would become tender to
each other and would not be ashamed of it, as now, and would caress each
other like children. Meeting each other, they would exchange deep and
meaningful looks, and there would be love and sadness in their eyes . . .
“My dear,” he suddenly broke off with a smile, “this is all a fantasy, even
quite an incredible one; but I have imagined it only too often, because all
my life I’ve been unable to live without it and not to think of it. I’m not
talking about my faith: I have no great faith, I’m a deist, a philosophical
deist, like all the thousand of us, as I suppose, but . . . but it’s remarkable
that I’ve always ended my picture with a vision, as in Heine, of ‘Christ on
the Baltic Sea.’35 I couldn’t do without him, I couldn’t help imagining him,
finally, amidst the orphaned people. He would come to them, stretch out his
arms to them, and say, ‘How could you have forgotten me?’ And here it

would be as if a veil fell from everyone’s eyes, and the great exultant hymn
of the new and last resurrection would ring out . . .
“Let’s drop it, my friend; and my ‘chains’ are nonsense; don’t worry
about them. And here’s another thing: you know that I’m modest and sober
of speech; if I fell to talking now, it’s . . . from various feelings, and because
it’s with you; I’ll never say it to anyone else. I add that to reassure you.”
But I was even touched; the falseness I had feared wasn’t there, and I was
especially glad, because it became clear to me that he really was yearning
and suffering and really, undoubtedly, had loved much—and for me that
was the most precious thing of all. I told him so with enthusiasm.
“But you know,” I suddenly added, “it seems to me that despite all your
yearning, you must have been extremely happy then.”
He laughed gaily.
“You’re particularly apt in your observations today,” he said. “Well, yes,
I was happy, and how could I be unhappy with such yearning? There’s no
one freer and happier than a Russian European wanderer from our
thousand. I say it, truly, without laughing, and there’s much that’s serious
here. Yes, I wouldn’t exchange my yearning for any other happiness. In this
sense I’ve always been happy, my dear, all my life. And out of happiness I
came to love your mama then for the first time in my life.”
“How, for the first time in your life?”
“Precisely so. In my wandering and yearning, I suddenly came to love
her as never before, and sent for her at once.”
“Oh, tell me about that, too, tell me about mama!”
“But that’s why I invited you, and, you know,” he smiled gaily, “I was
afraid you’d forgiven me mama on account of Herzen or some sort of little
conspiracy . . .”

Chapter Eight
I
SINCE WE WENT on talking all evening then and sat till it was night, I
won’t quote the whole conversation, but will just set down something that
explained to me, finally, one mysterious point in his life.
I’ll begin by saying that for me there’s no doubt that he loved mama, and
if he abandoned her and “unmarried” her when he went away, it was, of
course, because he had become too bored or something of the sort, which,
however, happens with everyone in the world, but which is always hard to
explain. Abroad, however, after a long while, he suddenly began to love
mama again from afar, that is, in thought, and sent for her. “Whimsicality,”
they may say, but I say something else: in my opinion, here was all that can
possibly be serious in human life, despite the apparent slip-slop, which I,
perhaps, partly make allowances for. But I swear that I put this European
yearning of his beyond question and not only on a par with, but
incomparably higher than, any contemporary practical activity in the
building of railroads. His love for mankind I acknowledge as a most sincere
and profound feeling, without any tricks; and his love for mama as
something completely unquestionable, though maybe a bit fantastic.
Abroad, “in yearning and happiness,” and, I’ll add, in the strictest monastic
solitude (this particular information I received later through Tatyana
Pavlovna), he suddenly remembered mama—remembered precisely her
“sunken cheeks”—and sent for her at once.
“My friend,” escaped him, among other things, “I suddenly realized that
my serving the idea did not free me, as a moral and reasonable being, from
the duty of making at least one person happy in practice during the course
of my life.”

“Can such a bookish thought really have been the cause of it all?” I asked
in perplexity.
“It’s not a bookish thought. However, perhaps it is. Here, though,
everything comes together, for I did love your mama really, sincerely, not
bookishly. If I hadn’t loved her so much, I wouldn’t have sent for her, but
would have ‘made happy’ some passing German man or woman, once I had
thought up the idea. And I would set it down as a commandment for any
developed man to make at least one being happy in his life, unfailingly and
in something, but to do it in practice, that is, in reality; just as I would set it
down as a law or an obligation for every peasant to plant at least one tree in
his life, in view of the deforestation of Russia; though one tree would be too
little, he can be ordered to plant a tree every year. The superior and
developed man, pursuing a superior thought, sometimes departs entirely
from the essential, becomes ridiculous, capricious, and cold, I’d even
simply say stupid, and not only in practical life, but, in the end, even stupid
in his theories. Thus, the duty of occupying oneself with the practical, and
of making at least one existing being happy, would in fact set everything
right and refresh the benefactor himself. As a theory, it’s very funny; but if
it became a practice and turned into a custom, it wouldn’t be stupid at all. I
experienced it for myself: as soon as I began to develop this idea of a new
commandment—at first, naturally, as a joke—I suddenly began to realize
the full extent of my love for your mother, which lay hidden in me. Till then
I had never realized that I loved her. While I lived with her I merely
enjoyed her, while she had her good looks, but then I became capricious.
Only in Germany did I realize that I loved her. It began with her sunken
cheeks, which I could never remember and sometimes couldn’t even see
without a pain in my heart—a literal pain, real, physical. There are painful
memories, my dear, which cause actual pain; nearly everyone has them,
only people forget them; but it happens that they suddenly remember later,
even only some feature, and then they can’t get rid of it. I began to recall a
thousand details of my life with Sonya; in the end they came to my memory
of themselves, pouring in a mass, and all but tormented me while I waited
for her. Most of all I was tormented by the memory of her eternal
abasement before me, and of her eternally considering herself infinitely
inferior to me in all respects—imagine, even the physical. She became

ashamed and blushed when I sometimes looked at her hands and fingers,
which were not at all aristocratic. And not her fingers only, she was
ashamed of everything in herself, despite the fact that I loved her beauty.
She had always been shy with me to the point of wildness, but the bad thing
was that a glimpse of some sort of fear, as it were, showed in this shyness.
In short, she considered herself a worthless or even almost indecent thing
next to me. Truly, once in a while, at the beginning, I sometimes thought
she still considered me her master and was afraid, but it wasn’t that at all.
And yet I swear she was better able than anyone else to understand my
shortcomings, and never in my life have I met a woman with such a subtle
and discerning heart. Oh, how unhappy she was in the beginning, while she
was still so good looking, when I demanded that she dress up. There was
self-love in it, and also some other offended feeling: she realized that she
could never be a lady, and that wearing clothes that weren’t for her only
made her ridiculous. As a woman, she didn’t want to feel ridiculous in her
clothes, and she realized that every woman had to wear dresses that were
hers—something that thousands and hundreds of thousands of women will
never realize, so long as they’re dressed fashionably. She was afraid of my
mocking look—that’s what it was! But it was especially sad for me to recall
her deeply astonished look, which I often caught on me during all our time.
It bespoke a perfect understanding of her fate and of the future in store for
her, so that it even made me feel bad, though, I confess, I didn’t get into any
conversations with her then, and treated it all somehow condescendingly.
And, you know, she wasn’t always so timorous and wild as she is now; even
now it happens that she suddenly gets as merry and pretty as a twenty-yearold; and then, when she was young, she sometimes liked very much to
chatter and laugh, in her own company, of course—with the girls, with the
women of the household; and how startled she’d be when I unexpectedly
found her laughing sometimes, how quickly she’d blush and look at me
timorously! Once, not long before I left for abroad, that is, almost on the
eve of my unmarrying her, I came into her room and found her alone, at the
little table, without any work, leaning her elbow on the table, and deep in
thought. It almost never happened with her that she would sit like that,
without work. By then I had long ceased to caress her. I managed to
approach very softly, on tiptoe, and suddenly embrace and kiss her . . . She
jumped up—and I’ll never forget that rapture, that happiness on her face,

and suddenly it all changed quickly to a blush, and her eyes flashed. Do you
know what I read in that flashing glance? ‘You’re giving me charity—that’s
what!’ She sobbed hysterically, under the pretext that I had frightened her,
but even then I fell to thinking. And in general, all such recollections are a
very hard thing, my friend. It’s the same as how, in a great artist’s poems,
there are sometimes such painful scenes that you remember them with pain
all your life afterwards—for instance, Othello’s last monologue in
Shakespeare, Evgeny at Tatyana’s feet, or the escaped convict meeting a
child, a little girl, on a cold night, by a well, in Victor Hugo’s Les
Misérables.36 It pierces your heart once, and the wound remains forever
after. Oh, how I waited for Sonya and how I wanted to embrace her
quickly! I dreamed with convulsive impatience of a whole new program of
life; I dreamed of destroying gradually, through methodical effort, this
constant fear she had of me in her soul, of explaining her own worth to her
and everything in which she was even superior to me. Oh, I knew only too
well then that I always began to love your mother as soon as we parted, and
always cooled towards her when we came together again; but here it wasn’t
that, this time it wasn’t that.”
I was surprised. “And she?” the question flashed in me.
“Well, and how was your meeting with mama then?” I asked warily.
“Then? But I didn’t meet her then at all. She barely got as far as
Königsberg then, and she stayed there, while I was on the Rhine. I didn’t go
to her, but told her to stay and wait. We saw each other much later, oh, a
long time later, when I went to ask her permission to marry . . .”

II
HERE I’LL CONVEY the essence of the matter, that is, only what I myself
could take in; and he also began telling me things incoherently. His speech
suddenly became ten times more incoherent and disorderly, just as he
reached this point.

He met Katerina Nikolaevna suddenly, precisely when he was expecting
mama, at the most impatient moment of expectation. They were all on the
Rhine then, at the waters, all taking the cure. Katerina Nikolaevna’s
husband was almost dying by then, or at least he had already been
sentenced to death by the doctors. From the first meeting she struck him as
with some sort of sorcery. It was a fatum.95 It’s remarkable that, writing it
down and recalling it now, I don’t remember him once using the word
“love” or saying he was “in love” in his account then. The word fatum I do
remember.
And it certainly was a fatum. He did not want it, “did not want to love.” I
don’t know whether I can convey it clearly; only his whole soul was
indignant precisely at the fact that this could have happened to him. All that
was free in him was annihilated at once in the face of this meeting, and the
man was forever fettered to a woman who wanted nothing at all to do with
him. He had no wish for this slavery of passion. I will say straight out now:
Katerina Nikolaevna is a rare type of society woman—a type which maybe
doesn’t exist in that circle. It is the type of the simple and straightforward
woman in the highest degree. I’ve heard, that is, I know for certain, that this
was what made her irresistible in society when she appeared in it (she often
withdrew from it completely). Versilov, naturally, did not believe then, on
first meeting her, that she was that way, but believed precisely the opposite,
that is, that she was a dissembler and a Jesuit. Skipping ahead, I will quote
here her own opinion of him: she maintained that he couldn’t think of her in
any other way, “because an idealist, when he runs his head into reality, is
always inclined, before anybody else, to assume all sorts of vileness.” I
don’t know whether that is true of idealists in general, but of him, of course,
it was fully true. Here, perhaps, I’ll set down my own opinion as well,
which flashed through my mind as I listened to him then: it occurred to me
that he loved mama with a more humane and generally human love, so to
speak, than the simple love with which one loves women in general, and, as
soon as he met a woman whom he loved with that simple love, he
immediately refused that love—most likely because he was unaccustomed
to it. However, maybe this is a wrong thought; of course, I didn’t say it to
him. It would have been indelicate; and I swear, he was in such a state that
he almost had to be spared: he was agitated; at some points of his story he

suddenly just broke off and was silent for several minutes, pacing the room
with an angry face.
She soon penetrated his secret then. Oh, maybe she also flirted with him
on purpose. Even the most shining women are mean on such occasions; that
is their irrepressible instinct. It ended with an embittered break between
them, and it seems he wanted to kill her; he frightened her and maybe
would have killed her; “but it all suddenly turned to hatred.” A strange
period ensued. He suddenly came up with the strange thought of tormenting
himself with discipline, “the same sort that monks exercise. Gradually and
by methodical practice, you overcome your will, beginning with the most
ridiculous and petty things, and ending by overcoming your will entirely
and becoming free.” He added that among monks this is a serious matter,
because it has been raised to the level of a science through a thousand years
of experience. But the most remarkable thing was that he came up with this
idea of “discipline” then, not at all in order to get rid of Katerina
Nikolaevna, but in the fullest certainty that he not only did not love her
anymore, but even hated her in the highest degree. He believed in his hatred
of her to such an extent that he even suddenly thought of falling in love
with and marrying her stepdaughter, who had been deceived by the prince,
persuaded himself completely of this new love, and got the poor idiot girl to
fall in love with him irresistibly, making her completely happy by this love
during the last months of her life. Why, instead of her, he didn’t remember
then about mama, who was waiting for him all the while in Königsberg,
remained unclear to me . . . On the contrary, he suddenly and entirely forgot
about mama, didn’t even send her money to live on, so that it was Tatyana
Pavlovna who saved her then. Suddenly, however, he went to mama to “ask
her permission” to marry that girl, under the pretext that “such a bride isn’t
a woman.” Oh, maybe this is all merely the portrait of a “bookish man,” as
Katerina Nikolaevna said of him afterwards; however, why is it that these
“paper people” (if it’s true that they are paper) are able to suffer in such a
real way and reach the point of such tragedies? Though then, that evening, I
thought somewhat differently, and was shaken by a certain thought:
“All your development, all your soul came to you through suffering and
through your whole life’s struggle—while all her perfection came to her

gratis. There’s inequality here . . . Women are outrageous in that,” I said,
not at all to ingratiate myself with him, but with fervor and even with
indignation.
“Perfection. Her perfection? Why, there’s no perfection in her!” he said
suddenly, all but astonished at my words. “She’s a most ordinary woman,
she’s even a trashy woman . . . But she’s obliged to have every perfection!”
“Why obliged?”
“Because, having such power, she’s obliged to have every perfection!” he
cried spitefully.
“The saddest thing is that you’re so tormented even now!” suddenly
escaped me involuntarily.
“Now? Tormented?” he repeated my words again, stopping before me as
if in some perplexity. And then suddenly a quiet, long, thoughtful smile lit
up his face, and he raised his finger before him as if reflecting. Then,
recovering completely, he snatched an unsealed letter from the table and
flung it down before me.
“Here, read it! You absolutely must know everything . . . and why did
you let me rummage around so much in that old rubbish! . . . I’ve only
defiled and embittered my heart! . . .”
I’m unable to express my astonishment. It was a letter from her to him,
written that day, received at around five o’clock in the afternoon. I read it
almost trembling with excitement. It wasn’t long, but was written so
directly and candidly that, as I read it, it was as if I could see her before me
and hear her words. Truthfully in the highest degree (and therefore almost
touchingly), she confessed to him her fear and then simply entreated him
“to leave her in peace.” In conclusion, she informed him that she was now
positively going to marry Bjoring. Until that occasion, she had never
written to him.
And here is what I understood then from his explanations:

As soon as he read this letter earlier, he suddenly sensed a most
unexpected phenomenon in himself: for the first time in those fateful two
years, he felt neither the slightest hatred for her nor the slightest shock,
similar to the way he had “gone out of his mind” not long ago at the mere
rumor about Bjoring. “On the contrary, I sent her a blessing from my whole
heart,” he said to me with deep feeling. I listened to these words with
delight. It meant that everything there was in him of passion, of torment,
had disappeared all at once, of itself, like a dream, like a two-year-long
enchantment. Still not believing himself, he rushed to mama—and what
then: he came in precisely at the moment when she became free, and the old
man who had bequeathed her to him the day before died. These two
coincidences shook his soul. A little later he rushed to look for me—and his
thinking of me so soon I will never forget.
Nor will I forget the end of that evening. This man became all and
suddenly transformed again. We sat late into the night. About how all this
“news” affected me, I will tell later, in its place, but now—just a few
concluding words about him. Reflecting now, I understand that what
charmed me most then was his humility, as it were, before me, his sotruthful sincerity before such a boy as I! “It was all fumes, but blessings on
it!” he cried. “Without that blindness I might never have discovered in my
heart so wholly and forever my sole queen, my sufferer—your mother!” I
make special note of these rapturous words that escaped him uncontrollably,
with a view to what followed. But then he conquered and overcame my
soul.
I remember, towards the end we became terribly merry. He ordered
champagne brought, and we drank to mama and to “the future.” Oh, he was
so full of life and so bent on living! But it wasn’t the wine that made us
terribly merry; we drank only two glasses each. I don’t know why, but
towards the end we laughed almost uncontrollably. We started talking about
totally unrelated things; he got to telling jokes, and so did I. Neither our
laughter nor our jokes were the least bit spiteful or jeering, we were simply
merry. He kept refusing to let me go: “Stay, stay a while longer!” he
repeated, and I stayed. He even went out to see me off; it was a lovely
evening, there was a slight frost.

“Tell me, have you already sent her a reply?” I suddenly asked quite
inadvertently, pressing his hand for the last time at the intersection.
“Not yet, no, and it makes no difference. Come tomorrow, come early . . .
And another thing: drop Lambert altogether, and tear up the ‘document,’
and soon. Good-bye!”
Having said that, he suddenly left. I remained standing there, and in such
confusion that I didn’t dare call him back. The expression “the document”
especially staggered me; from whom could he have learned of it, and in
such a precise expression, if not from Lambert? I returned home in great
confusion. And how could it happen, the thought flashed in me suddenly,
that such a “twoyear-long enchantment ” could vanish like a dream, like
fumes, like a phantom?

Chapter Nine
I
BUT I WOKE UP the next morning feeling fresher and heartier. I even
reproached myself, involuntarily and sincerely, for the certain levity and
haughtiness, as it were, with which I recalled listening yesterday to certain
parts of his “confession.” If it was partially disordered, if certain revelations
were as if somewhat fumy and even incoherent, he hadn’t really been
prepared for an oration when he invited me to his place yesterday. He only
did me a great honor, turning to me as to an only friend at such a moment,
and I will never forget it. On the contrary, his confession was “touching,”
however much I may be laughed at for the expression, and if there was an
occasional flash of the cynical or even of something seemingly ridiculous, I
was too broad not to understand and not to allow for realism—without,
however, besmirching the ideal. Above all, I had finally comprehended this
man, and I even felt partly sorry and as if vexed that it had all turned out so
simple. In my heart I had always placed this man extremely high, in the
clouds, and had unfailingly clothed his destiny in something mysterious, so
that I naturally wished that the key wouldn’t fit the lock so easily. However,
in his meeting with her and in his two-year-long suffering there was also
much that was complicated: “He refused the fatum of life; what he needed
was freedom, not slavery to the fatum; through slavery to the fatum he had
been obliged to offend mama, who was sitting in Königsberg . . .” Besides,
I considered this man, in any case, a preacher: he bore the golden age in his
heart and knew the future of atheism; and then the meeting with her had
shattered everything, perverted everything! Oh, I didn’t betray her, but still
I took his side. Mama, I reasoned, for instance, wouldn’t hinder anything in
his destiny, not even marriage to mama. That I understood; that was quite
other than the meeting with that one. True, all the same, mama would not
have given him peace, but that would even have been better: such people
ought to be judged differently, and let their life always be like that; and
there’s nothing unseemly in it; on the contrary, it would be unseemly if they

settled down, or generally became similar to all average people. His praise
of the nobility and his words, “Je mourrai gentilhomme,” didn’t confound
me in the least; I perceived what sort of gentilhomme he was; he was the
type who gives everything away and becomes the herald of world
citizenship and the main Russian thought of the “all-unification of ideas.”
And though that, too, was even all nonsense, that is, the “all-unification of
ideas” (which, of course, is unthinkable), still there was one good thing, that
all his life he had worshipped an idea, and not the stupid golden calf. My
God! I, I myself, when I conceived my “idea”—was I bowing down to the
golden calf? Was it money I wanted then? I swear I wanted only the idea! I
swear I wouldn’t have a single chair or sofa upholstered in velvet, and if I
had a hundred million, I’d eat the same bowl of beef soup as now!
I was dressing and hurrying to him irrepressibly. I will add: concerning
his outburst yesterday about the “document,” I was also five times more at
ease than yesterday. First, I hoped to clarify things with him, and, second,
so what if Lambert had filtered through to him and they had talked
something over? But my chief joy was in one extraordinary sensation; this
was the thought that he “didn’t love her” now; I believed in that terribly,
and felt as if someone had rolled an awful stone off my heart. I even
remember the flash of a certain surmise then: precisely the ugliness and
senselessness of his last fierce outburst at the news about Bjoring and the
sending of that insulting letter then; precisely that extremity could also have
served as a prophecy and precursor of the most radical change in his
feelings and of his approaching return to common sense. It must have been
almost as with an illness, I thought, and he precisely had to reach the
opposite extreme—a medical episode and nothing more! This thought made
me happy.
“And let her, let her dispose of her fate as she likes, let her marry her
Bjoring as much as she likes, only let him, my father, my friend, not love
her anymore,” I exclaimed. However, there was in it a certain secret of my
own feelings, but I don’t wish to smear it around here in my notes.
Enough of that. And now I will tell all the horror that followed, and all
the machinations of the facts, without any discussions.

II
AT TEN O’CLOCK, just as I was ready to go out—to see him, of course—
Nastasya Egorovna appeared. I asked her joyfully if she was coming from
him, and heard with vexation that it was not from him at all, but from Anna
Andreevna, and that she, Nastasya Egorovna, had “left the apartment at first
light.”
“Which apartment?”
“The same one as yesterday. Yesterday’s apartment, the one with the little
baby, is rented in my name now, and Tatyana Pavlovna pays . . .”
“Ah, well, it makes no difference to me!” I interrupted with vexation. “Is
he at home at least? Will I find him in?”
And to my astonishment I heard from her that he had left the premises
even before she had—meaning that she had left “at first light,” and he still
earlier.
“Well, so now he’s come back?”
“No, sir, he certainly hasn’t come back, and he may not come back at
all,” she said, looking at me with the same keen and furtive eye, and not
taking it off me, just as she had done when she visited me while I lay sick.
What mainly made me explode was that here again some secrets and
stupidities emerged, and that these people apparently couldn’t do without
secrets and slyness.
“Why did you say he certainly won’t come back? What are you
implying? He went to mama’s, that’s all!”
“I d-don’t know, sir.”
“And why were you so good as to come?”

She told me that she had come now from Anna Andreevna, who was
sending for me and expected me at once, otherwise “it would be too late.”
This further mysterious phrase drove me completely beside myself.
“Why too late? I don’t want to go and I won’t go! I won’t let myself be
taken over again! I spit on Lambert—tell her that, and that if she sends
Lambert to me, I’ll chuck him out—just tell her that!”
Nastasya Egorovna was terribly frightened.
“Ah, no, sir!” she stepped towards me, pressing her hands together as if
entreating me, “take your time before you go hurrying so. This is an
important matter, very important for you yourself, and also for the lady, and
for Andrei Petrovich, and for your mama, for everybody . . . Do go to Anna
Andreevna at once, because she simply can’t wait any longer . . . I assure
you on my honor . . . and then you can make your decision.”
I stared at her in amazement and disgust.
“Nonsense, nothing will happen, I won’t go!” I cried stubbornly and
gleefully. “Now everything will be a new way! And how can you
understand that? Good-bye, Nastasya Egorovna, I purposely won’t go, I
purposely won’t ask you any questions. You only throw me off. I don’t want
to enter into your riddles.”
But as she wouldn’t leave and went on standing there, I grabbed my coat
and hat and went out myself, leaving her there in the middle of the room.
There were no letters or papers in my room, and previously I had almost
never locked my door when I left. But before I reached the front door, my
landlord, Pyotr Ippolitovich, came running down the stairs after me, hatless
and in his uniform.
“Arkady Makarovich! Arkady Makarovich!”
“What is it now?”
“Have you no orders on leaving?”

“None.”
He looked at me with a stabbing glance and with evident uneasiness.
“Concerning the apartment, for instance?”
“What about the apartment? Didn’t I send you the money on time?”
“No, sir, I’m not talking about money,” he suddenly smiled a long smile
and went on stabbing me with his glance.
“What’s the matter with you all?” I finally cried, almost totally ferocious.
“What are you after?”
He waited for another few seconds, as if he still expected something from
me.
“Well, so you can give the orders later . . . if you’re not in the mood
now,” he murmured, with an even longer grin. “Go on, sir, and I myself
have my duties.”
He ran upstairs to his apartment. Of course, all that could set one to
thinking. I’m purposely not leaving out the slightest stroke from all that
petty nonsense, because every little stroke of it later went into the final
bouquet, where it found its proper place, as the reader will ascertain. But it
was true that they really threw me off then. If I was so agitated and
annoyed, it was precisely because I again heard in their words that tiresome
tone of intrigue and riddling that reminded me of the old days. But to
continue.
Versilov turned out not to be at home, and he had indeed gone out at first
light. “To mama’s, of course,” I stubbornly stood my ground. I asked no
questions of the nanny, a rather stupid woman, and there was no one else in
the apartment. I ran to mama’s, and, I confess, I was so worried that
halfway there I grabbed a cab. He hadn’t been at mama’s since last evening.
Only Tatyana Pavlovna and Liza were with mama. As soon as I came in,
Liza started preparing to leave.

They were all sitting upstairs in my “coffin.” In our drawing room
downstairs, Makar Ivanovich was laid out on the table,37 and some old man
was measuredly reading the psalter over him. I won’t describe anything
now that is not directly related to the matter, but will just observe that the
coffin, which they had already had time to make and was standing right
there in the room, was not simple, though black, but was lined with velvet,
and the shroud on the deceased was an expensive one—a magnificence not
suited to the old man or his convictions, but such was the express wish of
both mama and Tatyana Pavlovna.
Naturally, I didn’t expect to find them cheerful; but the peculiarly
oppressive anguish, with concern and uneasiness, that I read in their eyes,
struck me immediately, and I instantly concluded that “here, surely, the
deceased is not the only cause.” All this, I repeat, I remember perfectly
well.
Despite all, I embraced mama tenderly and asked at once about him. An
alarmed curiosity instantly flashed in mama’s eyes. I hastily mentioned that
he and I had spent the whole last evening together, till late into the night,
but that today he hadn’t been at home since daybreak, whereas just
yesterday he had invited me himself, as we were parting, to come today as
early as possible. Mama made no reply, and Tatyana Pavlovna, seizing the
moment, shook her finger at me.
“Good-bye, brother,” Liza suddenly cut off, quickly going out of the
room. I naturally went after her, but she had stopped right at the front door.
“I thought it might occur to you to come down,” she said in a quick
whisper.
“Liza, what’s going on here?”
“I don’t know myself, only there’s a lot of something. Probably the
dénouement of the ‘eternal story.’ He hasn’t come, but they have some sort
of information about him. They won’t tell you, don’t worry, and you won’t

ask, if you’re smart; but mama is crushed. I didn’t ask about anything either.
Good-bye.”
She opened the door.
“But, Liza, what about you?” I sprang after her into the hallway. Her
terribly crushed, desperate air pierced my heart. She gave me a look, not so
much angry as even almost somehow embittered, grinned biliously, and
waved her hand.
“If he died—it would be a godsend!” she flung at me from the stairs, and
went out. She said this of Prince Sergei Petrovich, who at the time was
lying in delirium and unconscious. “Eternal story! What eternal story?” I
thought with defiance, and then suddenly I absolutely wanted to tell them at
least part of my impressions yesterday from his night confession, and the
confession itself. “They think something bad about him now—let them
know all!” flew through my head.
I remember that I managed somehow very deftly to begin my story. Their
faces instantly showed a terrible curiosity. This time Tatyana Pavlovna
simply fastened her eyes on me, but mama was more restrained; she was
very serious, but a light, beautiful, though somehow quite hopeless smile
came to her face and almost never left it all the while I was talking. I spoke
well, of course, though I knew that for them it was almost
incomprehensible. To my surprise, Tatyana Pavlovna did not pick on me,
did not insist on exactitude, did not try to catch me up, as she was
accustomed to do whenever I began saying something. She only pressed her
lips occasionally and narrowed her eyes, as if making an effort to
comprehend. At times it even seemed to me that they understood
everything, but that was all but impossible. I talked, for instance, about his
convictions, but, above all, about his rapture yesterday, about his rapture
over mama, about his love for mama, about how he kissed her portrait . . .
Listening to that, they exchanged quick and silent glances, and mama
turned all red, though they both went on being silent. Then . . . then, of
course, I couldn’t touch on the main point before mama, that is, the meeting
with her and all the rest, and, above all, her letter to him yesterday and his

moral “resurrection” after the letter; but that was the main thing, so that all
his feelings yesterday, with which I had thought to gladden mama, naturally
remained incomprehensible, though, of course, through no fault of my own,
because all that could be told, I told beautifully. I ended in total perplexity;
their silence remained unbroken, and it became very oppressive for me to
be with them.
“Surely he’s come back by now, or maybe he’s sitting at my place and
waiting,” I said, and got up to leave.
“Go, go!” Tatyana Pavlovna firmly agreed.
“Have you been downstairs?” mama asked me in a half-whisper, as I was
taking my leave.
“Yes, I bowed down to him and prayed for him. Such a calm, seemly face
he has, mama! Thank you, mama, for not sparing on his coffin. First I found
it strange, but then I thought at once that I would have done the same
myself.”
“Will you come to church tomorrow?” she asked, and her lips trembled.
“What are you asking, mama?” I was surprised. “I’ll come to the
panikhida38 today, too, and I’ll come again; and . . . besides, tomorrow is
your birthday, mama, my dearest! He didn’t live the three days till then!”
I left in painful astonishment. How could she ask such questions—
whether I’d come to the funeral at the church or not? “And if it’s so about
me, then what do they think about him?”
I knew that Tatyana Pavlovna would come running after me, and I
purposely lingered in the front doorway; but she, having overtaken me,
pushed me out onto the stairway with her hand, came out after me, and
closed the door behind her.
“Tatyana Pavlovna, you mean you don’t expect Andrei Petrovich either
today or tomorrow? I’m alarmed . . .”

“Quiet. Much it matters that you’re alarmed. Speak—what was it you
didn’t finish saying when you told about yesterday’s balderdash?”
I found no need to conceal it, and, almost annoyed with Versilov, told her
all about Katerina Nikolaevna’s letter to him yesterday, and about the effect
of the letter, that is, his resurrection into a new life. To my surprise, the fact
of the letter didn’t surprise her in the least, and I guessed that she already
knew about it.
“You’re not lying?”
“No, I’m not.”
“Well, now,” she smiled venomously, as if pondering, “resurrected! Just
what he’d do! Is it true that he kissed the portrait?”
“It’s true, Tatyana Pavlovna.”
“Did he kiss it with feeling, without pretending?”
“Pretending? Does he ever pretend? Shame on you, Tatyana Pavlovna;
you have a coarse soul, a woman’s soul.”
I said it heatedly, but it was as if she didn’t hear me. She again seemed to
be figuring something out, despite the intense cold on the stairway. I was
wearing a fur coat, but she was wearing only a dress.
“I’d entrust you with an errand, but the trouble is you’re very stupid,” she
said with contempt and as if with vexation. “Listen, go to Anna
Andreevna’s and see what’s happening there . . . Ah, no, don’t go; a dolt is a
dolt! Leave, be off, don’t stand there like a post!”
“I’m just not going to go to Anna Andreevna’s! And Anna Andreevna
sent for me herself.”
“Herself? Sent Nastasya Egorovna?” she quickly turned to me. She was
on the point of leaving and had even opened the door, but she slammed it

shut again.
“I won’t go to Anna Andreevna’s for anything!” I repeated with spiteful
glee. “I won’t go, because you just called me a dolt, while I’ve never been
so perspicacious as today. I can see all your doings as if on the palm of my
hand; and even so I won’t go to Anna Andreevna’s!”
“I just knew it!” she exclaimed, but, again, not in response to my words,
but continuing to think her own thoughts. “They’ll ensnare her completely
now, and tighten the deadly noose!”
“Anna Andreevna?”
“Fool!”
“Whom do you mean, then? Not Katerina Nikolaevna? What deadly
noose?” I was terribly frightened. Some vague but terrible idea passed
through my soul. Tatyana Pavlovna looked at me piercingly.
“And what are you doing in it?” she asked suddenly. “What’s your part? I
did hear something about you—oh, watch out!”
“Listen, Tatyana Pavlovna, I’ll tell you a terrible secret, only not now, I
have no time now, but tomorrow, when we’re alone, but in return tell me the
whole truth now, and what this is about the deadly noose . . . because I’m
trembling all over . . .”
“I spit on your trembling!” she exclaimed. “What secret do you want to
tell me tomorrow? Can it really be that you know something?” she fixed me
with her questioning gaze. “Didn’t you swear to her yourself that you had
burned Kraft’s letter?”
“Tatyana Pavlovna, I repeat, don’t torment me,” I went on with my own
thing, ignoring her question in turn, because I was beside myself, “watch
out, Tatyana Pavlovna, what you hide from me may lead to something
worse . . . why, yesterday he was in full, in the fullest resurrection!”

“Eh, away with you, buffoon! You must be in love like a sparrow
yourself—father and son with the same object! Pah, outrageous creatures!”
She disappeared, slamming the door in indignation. Infuriated by the
impudent, shameless cynicism of her very last words—a cynicism that only
a woman is capable of—I rushed off, deeply offended. But I won’t describe
my vague sensations, as I’ve already promised; I will continue with just the
facts, which will now resolve everything. Naturally, I ran over to his place
for a moment, and again heard from the nanny that he hadn’t been there.
“And he won’t come at all?”
“God knows.”

III
FACTS, FACTS!...But does the reader understand anything? I myself
remember how these same facts weighed on me then and kept me from
comprehending anything, so that by the end of that day my head was totally
thrown off. And therefore I’ll run ahead for two or three words!
All my torments consisted in this: if yesterday he had resurrected and
stopped loving her, then in that case where should he have been today?
Answer: first of all with me, since he had spent last night embracing me,
and then right away with mama, whose portrait he had kissed yesterday.
And yet, instead of these two natural steps, suddenly, at “first light,” he’s
not at home and has disappeared somewhere, and Nastasya Egorovna raves,
for some reason, that “he most likely won’t come back.” What’s more, Liza
assures me of some dénouement to an “eternal story” and of mama’s having
some information about him, and of the very latest; on top of that, they
undoubtedly knew about Katerina Nikolaevna’s letter as well (I noticed it
myself ), and still they didn’t believe in his “resurrection into a new life,”
though they listened to me attentively. Mama is crushed, and Tatyana
Pavlovna jokes caustically about the word “resurrection.” But if that’s all
so, then it means he had another turnabout during the night, another crisis,
and that—after yesterday’s rapture, tenderness, pathos! It means that all this

“resurrection” popped like a blown-up bubble, and at the moment he might
be knocking around somewhere in the same rage as the other time, after the
news about Bjoring! One might ask, what would become of mama, of me,
of us all, and . . . and, finally, what would become of her? What “deadly
noose” had Tatyana let on about, sending me to Anna Andreevna? It means
the “deadly noose” is there—at Anna Andreevna’s! Why at Anna
Andreevna’s? Naturally, I’ll run to Anna Andreevna’s; I said purposely, out
of vexation, that I wouldn’t go; I’ll run right now. But what was Tatyana
Pavlovna saying about the “document ”? And didn’t he himself say to me
yesterday, “Burn the document”?
These were my thoughts, this was what also weighed on me like a deadly
noose; but above all I wanted him. With him I’d resolve everything at once
—I could feel it; we’d understand each other after two words! I’d seize his
hands, press them; I’d find ardent words in my heart—that was my
irresistible dream. Oh, I would subdue his madness! . . . But where was he?
Where? And just then, at such a moment, Lambert had to appear, when I
was so worked up! A few steps from home I suddenly met Lambert; he
yelled joyfully when he saw me and seized me by the arm:
“It’s the thighrd time I’ve come to see you . . . Enfin! Let’s go and have
lunch.”
“Wait! Were you at my place? Is Andrei Petrovich there?”
“Nobody’s there. Drop them all! You got angry yesterday, you cghretin;
you were drunk, but I have something important to tell you; today I heard
some lovely news about what we were discussing yesterday . . .”
“Lambert,” I interrupted, breathless and hurrying and involuntarily
declaiming a little, “if I’ve stopped with you, it’s only in order to be done
with you forever. I told you yesterday, but you still don’t understand.
Lambert, you’re a child and as stupid as a Frenchman. You still think you’re
as you were at Touchard’s and I’m as stupid as at Touchard’s . . . But I’m
not as stupid as at Touchard’s . . . I was drunk yesterday, but not from wine,
but because I was excited to begin with; and if I went along with what you

were driveling, it was from cunning, in order to worm your thoughts out of
you. I deceived you, and you were glad, and believed, and driveled. Know
that marrying her is such nonsense that a first-year schoolboy wouldn’t
believe it. Could anyone think I believed it? But you did! You believed it,
because you’re not received in high society and know nothing of how
things are done in high society. Things aren’t done so simply in high
society, and it’s impossible that a woman should so simply—up and get
married . . . Now I’ll tell you clearly what you want: you want to invite me
to your place and get me drunk, so that I’ll hand over the document to you,
and together we’ll pull some sort of swindle on Katerina Nikolaevna! What
rubbish! I’ll never go to your place, and know also that by tomorrow, or the
day after without fail, this paper will be in her own hands, because this
document belongs to her, because she wrote it, and I’ll hand it to her
personally, and if you want to know where, know that I’ll do it through
Tatyana Pavlovna, her acquaintance, in Tatyana Pavlovna’s apartment—I’ll
hand it to her in Tatyana Pavlovna’s presence, and take nothing from her for
it . . . And now—off with you, forever, or else . . . or else, Lambert, I’ll deal
with you less politely . . .”
When I finished, I was trembling all over. The main thing and the nastiest
habit in life, which harms every manner of business, is . . . is when you start
showing off. The devil pushed me to get so worked up in front of him that,
as I finished speaking, rapping out the words with pleasure, and raising my
voice more and more, I suddenly got so heated that I threw in this totally
unnecessary detail about handing over the document through Tatyana
Pavlovna and in her apartment! But I suddenly wanted so much to
disconcert him then! When I burst out so directly about the document and
suddenly saw his stupid fright, I wanted to crush him still more with precise
details. And this boastful, womanish babble later became the cause of
terrible misfortunes, because this detail about Tatyana Pavlovna and her
apartment lodged at once in his mind, the mind of a swindler and practical
petty dealer; in higher and more important matters he’s worthless and
understands nothing, but still he does have a flair for these petty things. If I
had kept quiet about Tatyana Pavlovna, great misfortunes would not have
occurred. However, on hearing me, for the first moment he was terribly at a
loss.

“Listen,” he muttered, “Alphonsina . . . Alphonsina will sing . . .
Alphonsina went to see her; listen, I have a letter, almost a letter, where
Mme. Akhmakov talks about you, the pockmarked one got it for me—
remember the pockmarked one?—you’ll see now, you’ll see, come on!”
“Lies! Show me the letter!”
“It’s at home, Alphonsina has it, come on!”
Of course, he was lying and raving, trembling for fear I might run away
from him; but I suddenly abandoned him in the middle of the street, and
when he made as if to follow me, I stopped and shook my fist at him. But
he already stood thinking—and let me go: maybe a new plan was already
flashing in his head. But for me the surprises and encounters weren’t over . .
. And when I remember that whole unfortunate day, it seems to me that all
these surprises and accidents had as if conspired together then to come
pouring down on my head at once from some cursed cornucopia. I had
hardly opened the door to my apartment when, in the front hall, I ran into a
tall young man with an elongated and pale face, of imposing and “graceful”
appearance, and wearing a magnificent fur coat. He had a pince-nez on his
nose; but as soon as he saw me, he pulled it off his nose (apparently out of
courtesy) and, politely raising his top hat with his hand, though without
stopping, said to me with a graceful smile, “Ha, bonsoir,”96 and walked past
me to the stairs. We recognized each other immediately, though I had seen
him fleetingly only once in my life, in Moscow. It was Anna Andreevna’s
brother, the kammerjunker, the young Versilov, Versilov’s son and therefore
almost my brother. He was being shown out by the landlady (the landlord
hadn’t come home from work yet). When he left, I simply fell upon her:
“What was he doing here? Was he in my room?”
“Not at all. He came to see me . . .” she broke off quickly and drily and
turned to go to her room.
“No, not like that!” I shouted. “Kindly answer: what did he come for?”

“Ah, my God! so I’m to tell you all about what people come for! I
believe we, too, can have our concerns. The young man may have wanted
to borrow money, to find out an address from me. I may have promised him
last time . . .”
“Last time when?”
“Ah, my God, but it’s not the first time he’s come!”
She left. Above all, I understood that the tone was changing here: they
were beginning to speak rudely to me. It was clear that this was again a
secret; secrets accumulated with every step, every hour. The young Versilov
came the first time with his sister, Anna Andreevna, while I was sick; I
remembered it only too well, as I did the fact that Anna Andreevna had let
drop to me yesterday an extraordinary little phrase, that the old prince might
stay in my apartment . . . but it was all so jumbled and so grotesque that I
could come up with almost no thoughts in that regard. Slapping myself on
the forehead and not even sitting down to rest, I ran to Anna Andreevna’s.
She was not at home, and the answer I got from the porter was that “she had
gone to Tsarskoe, would be back around the same time tomorrow.”
“She goes to Tsarskoe, to the old prince, of course, while her brother
inspects my apartment! No, this will not be!” I rasped. “And if there is
indeed some deadly noose here, I’ll protect the ‘poor woman’!”
I didn’t return home from Anna Andreevna’s, because there suddenly
flashed in my inflamed head the memory of the tavern on the canal where
Andrei Petrovich was accustomed to go in his dark moments. Delighted
with my surmise, I instantly ran there; it was past three o’clock and dusk
was gathering. In the tavern I was told that he had come: “He stayed a little
while and left, but maybe he’ll come again.” I suddenly resolved with all
my might to wait for him, and ordered dinner; at least there was a hope.
I ate dinner, even ate too much, so as to have the right to stay as long as
possible, and sat there, I think, for some four hours. I won’t describe my
sadness and feverish impatience; it was as if everything in me was shaking
and trembling. The barrel organ, the customers—oh, all that anguish left an

imprint on my soul, maybe for my whole life! I won’t describe the thoughts
that arose in my head like a cloud of dry leaves in autumn after a gust of
wind; it really was something like that, and, I confess, I felt at times as if
reason was beginning to betray me.
But what tormented me to the point of pain (in passing, naturally, on the
side, past the main torment), was one nagging, venomous impression—as
nagging as a venomous autumn fly, which you give no thought to, but
which circles around you, pestering you, and suddenly gives you a very
painful bite. It was just a memory, a certain event, of which I had not yet
told anyone in the world. Here’s what it was, for this, too, has to be told
somewhere or other.

IV
WHEN IT WAS decided in Moscow that I would go to Petersburg, I was
given to know through Nikolai Semyonovich that I should expect money to
be sent for the trip. Who the money would come from, I didn’t ask; I knew
it was from Versilov, and since I dreamed day and night then, with a leaping
heart and high-flown plans, about my meeting with Versilov, I completely
stopped speaking of him aloud, even with Marya Ivanovna. Remember,
however, that I had my own money for the trip; but I decided to wait
anyway; incidentally, I assumed the money would come by post.
Suddenly one day Nikolai Semyonovich came home and informed me
(briefly, as usual, and without smearing it around) that I should go to
Miasnitskaya Street the next day, at eleven o’clock in the morning, to the
home and apartment of Prince V——sky, and that there the kammerjunker
Versilov, Andrei Petrovich’s son, who had come from Petersburg and was
staying with his lycée comrade, Prince V——sky, would hand me the sum
sent for my moving expenses. It seemed quite a simple matter: Andrei
Petrovich might very well charge his son with this errand instead of sending
it by post; but this news crushed me and alarmed me somehow unnaturally.
There was no doubt that Versilov wanted to bring me together with his son,
my brother; thus the intentions and feelings of the man I dreamed of were
clearly outlined; but an enormous question presented itself to me: how

would and how should I behave myself in this quite unexpected meeting,
and would my own dignity not suffer in some way?
The next day, at exactly eleven o’clock, I came to Prince V——sky’s
apartment—bachelor’s quarters, but, as I could guess, magnificently
furnished, with liveried lackeys. I stopped in the front hall. From the inner
rooms came the sounds of loud talk and laughter: besides the visiting
kammerjunker, the prince had other guests. I told the lackey to announce
me, evidently in rather proud terms: at least, on going to announce me, he
looked at me strangely, as it seemed to me, and even not as respectfully as
he should have. To my surprise, he took a very long time announcing me,
some five minutes, and meanwhile the same laughter and the same sounds
of talk came from inside.
I, naturally, stood while I waited, knowing very well that for me, as “just
as much a gentleman,” it was unfitting and impossible to sit in the front hall
where there were lackeys. I myself, of my own will, without a special
invitation, would not have set foot in the reception room for anything, out
of pride—out of refined pride, maybe, but so it had to be. To my surprise,
the remaining lackeys (two) dared to sit down in my presence. I turned
away so as not to notice it, but nevertheless I began trembling all over, and
suddenly, turning and stepping towards one of the lackeys, I ordered him to
go “at once” and announce me again. In spite of my stern gaze and my
extreme agitation, the lackey looked at me lazily, without getting up, and
the other one answered for him:
“You’ve been announced, don’t worry!”
I decided to wait only one minute more, or possibly even less than a
minute, and then—leave without fail. The main thing was that I was dressed
quite decently; my suit and overcoat were new, after all, and my linen was
perfectly fresh, Marya Ivanovna had purposely seen to that for the occasion.
But about these lackeys I learned for certain much later, and already in
Petersburg, that they had learned the day before, through the servant who
came with Versilov, that “so-and-so would be coming, the natural brother
and a student.” That I now know for certain.

A minute passed. It’s a strange feeling, when you’re making up your
mind and can’t make it up: “To leave or not, to leave or not?” I repeated
every second, almost in a cold fit. Suddenly the servant who had gone to
announce me reappeared. In his hand, between finger and thumb, dangled
four red banknotes, forty roubles.
“Here, sir, kindly take these forty roubles!”
I boiled over. This was such an insult! All the past night I had dreamed of
the meeting of the two brothers arranged by Versilov; all night I had
feverishly imagined how I should behave so as not to abase myself—not to
abase the whole cycle of ideas I had lived out in my solitude and which I
could be proud of even in any circle. I had imagined how I would be noble,
proud, and sad, maybe even in the company of Prince V——sky, and thus
would be introduced straight into that world—oh, I’m not sparing myself,
and so be it, so be it: it must be written down exactly in these details! And
suddenly—forty roubles through a lackey, in the front hall, and what’s
more, after ten minutes of waiting, and what’s more, straight from his hand,
from his lackeyish fingers, not on a salver, not in an envelope!
I shouted so loudly at the lackey that he gave a start and recoiled; I
immediately told him to take the money back, and so that “his master
should bring it himself ”—in short, my demand was, of course, incoherent
and, of course, incomprehensible for a lackey. However, I shouted so loudly
that he went. Moreover, it seems my shouting was heard in the reception
room, and the talk and laughter suddenly died down.
Almost at once I heard footsteps, imposing, unhurried, soft, and the tall
figure of a handsome and haughty young man (he seemed to me still paler
and leaner then than at today’s meeting) appeared on the threshold of the
front hall—even five feet before the threshold. He was wearing a
magnificent red silk dressing gown and slippers, and had a pince-nez on his
nose. Without saying a word, he turned his pince-nez on me and began to
study me. I, like a beast, took a step towards him and stood there in
defiance, staring at him point-blank. But he studied me for just a moment,
ten seconds at most; suddenly a most imperceptible smile appeared on his

lips, and yet a most caustic one, caustic precisely in being almost
imperceptible. He silently turned and went back inside, as unhurriedly, as
quietly and smoothly, as he had come. Oh, these offenders from childhood,
who still in the bosom of their families are taught by their mothers to
offend! Naturally, I was at a loss . . . Oh, why was I at a loss then!
Almost at the same moment, the same lackey reappeared with the same
banknotes in his hand:
“Kindly take this, it has been sent to you from Petersburg, and the master
cannot receive you himself; ‘perhaps some other time, when he’s more
free’”—I felt he added these last words on his own. But my lostness still
persisted; I took the money and went to the door; took it precisely because I
was at a loss, because I should have refused it; but the lackey, of course,
wishing to wound me, allowed himself a most lackeyish escapade: he
suddenly thrust the door open emphatically before me and, holding it open,
said imposingly and deliberately, as I went past him:
“If you please, sir!”
“Scoundrel!” I roared at him, and suddenly raised my arm, but didn’t
bring it down. “And your master’s a scoundrel, too! Report that to him at
once!” I added, and quickly went out to the stairs.
“You daren’t do that! If I report it to the master right now, you could be
sent with a note to the police this very minute. And you daren’t raise your
arm . . .”
I was going down the stairs. It was a grand stairway, all open, and I was
fully visible from above as I went down the red carpet. All three lackeys
came out and stood looking over the banister. I, of course, resolved to keep
silent; it was impossible to squabble with lackeys. I went all the way down
without quickening my pace, and maybe even slowing it.
Oh, there may be philosophers (and shame on them!) who will say that
this is all trifles, the vexation of a milksop—there may be, but for me it was
a wound, a wound that hasn’t healed even to this minute, as I write, when

everything is over and even avenged. Oh, I swear, I’m not rancorous or
vengeful! Unquestionably, I always want revenge, even to the point of pain,
when I’m offended, but I swear—only with magnanimity. Let me repay him
with magnanimity, but so that he feels it, so that he understands it—and I’m
avenged! Incidentally, I’ll add that I’m not vengeful, but I am rancorous,
though also magnanimous. Does that happen to others? But then, oh, then I
had come with magnanimous feelings, maybe ridiculous, but let it be.
Better let them be ridiculous and magnanimous than not ridiculous but
mean, humdrum, and average! I never revealed anything about that meeting
with my “brother” to anyone, not even to Marya Ivanovna, or to Liza in
Petersburg; that meeting was the same as receiving a shameful slap in the
face. And now suddenly I meet this gentleman when I least expect to meet
him; he smiles at me, tips his hat, and says with perfect amiability:
“Bonsoir.” Of course, that was worth pondering . . . But the wound was
reopened!

V
HAVING SAT FOR some four hours in the tavern, I suddenly rushed out as
if in a fit—naturally, again to Versilov’s and, naturally, again I didn’t find
him at home; he hadn’t come back at all. The nanny was bored and asked
me to send Nastasya Egorovna—oh, as if I could be bothered with that! I
ran by mama’s, too, but I didn’t go in, but asked Lukerya to come out to the
hallway; from her I learned that he hadn’t come and that Liza wasn’t there
either. I saw that Lukerya would also have liked to ask something and
maybe also to have sent me on some errand—as if I could be bothered with
that! There remained a last hope, that he had been at my place; but I no
longer believed in it.
I have already let it be known that I was almost losing my reason. And
then in my room I suddenly found Alphonsinka and my landlord. True, they
were on their way out, and Pyotr Ippolitovich had a candle in his hand.
“What is this?” I yelled almost senselessly at my landlord. “How dared
you bring this rascally woman to my room?”

“Tiens!” Alphonsinka cried out, “et les amis?”97
“Out!” I bellowed.
“Mais c’est un ours!”98 she fluttered out to the corridor, pretending to be
frightened, and instantly disappeared into the landlady’s room. Pyotr
Ippolitovich, still holding the candle, approached me with a stern look.
“Allow me to observe to you, Arkady Makarovich, that you have grown
too hot-tempered; much as we respect you, Mamzelle Alphonsine is not a
rascally woman, but even quite the contrary, she is here as a guest, and not
yours, but my wife’s, with whom she has been mutually acquainted for
some time now.”
“But how dared you bring her to my room?” I repeated, clutching my
head, which almost suddenly began to ache terribly.
“By chance, sir. I went in to close the vent window, which I myself had
opened for the fresh air; and since Alphonsina Karlovna and I were
continuing our previous conversation, in the midst of this conversation she,
too, went into your room, solely to accompany me.”
“Not true, Alphonsinka’s a spy, Lambert’s a spy! Maybe you’re a spy
yourself! And Alphonsinka came to steal something from me.”
“That’s as you like. Today you’re pleased to say one thing, tomorrow
another. And my apartment I’ve rented out for a while, and will move with
my wife into the storeroom; so Alphonsina Karlovna is now almost as much
of a tenant here as you are, sir.”
“You’ve rented out the apartment to Lambert?” I cried in fear.
“No, sir, not to Lambert,” he smiled his previous long smile, in which,
however, firmness could now be seen instead of the morning’s perplexity. “I
suppose you’re so good as to know to whom, and are only putting on a vain
air of not knowing, solely for the beauty of it, sir, and that’s why you’re
angry. Good night, sir!”

“Yes, yes, leave me, leave me in peace!” I waved my hands, all but
weeping, so that he suddenly looked at me in surprise; however, he left. I
fastened the latch on the door and collapsed on my bed, face to the pillow.
And so there passed for me the first terrible day of those three fateful last
days with which my notes conclude.

Chapter Ten
I
BUT AGAIN, ANTICIPATING the course of events, I find it necessary to
explain at least something to the reader beforehand, for here so many
chance things mingled with the logical sequence of this story that it is
impossible to make it out without explaining them beforehand. Here the
matter consisted in that same “deadly noose” that Tatyana Pavlovna had let
on about. The noose consisted in Anna Andreevna risking, finally, the
boldest step that could be imagined in her situation. True character! Though
the old prince, under the pretext of health, had been opportunely confiscated
to Tsarskoe Selo then, so that the news of his marriage to Anna Andreevna
might not spread in society and for a time would be snuffed out, so to
speak, in the bud, nevertheless, the feeble old man, with whom anything
could be done, would not for any reason in the world abandon his idea and
betray Anna Andreevna, who had proposed to him. On this account he was
chivalrous; so that sooner or later he might suddenly rise up and set about
fulfilling his intention with irrepressible force, which is quite, quite likely to
happen precisely with weak characters, for they have this limit, to which
they ought not to be driven. Besides, he was perfectly aware of all the
ticklishness of the position of Anna Andreevna, for whom he had boundless
respect, aware of the possibility of society rumors, mockery, and bad fame
on her account. The only thing that had restrained and stopped him so far
was that in his presence Katerina Nikolaevna had never once, either by a
word or a hint, allowed herself to mention Anna Andreevna in a bad sense,
or betray anything at all against his intention to marry her. On the contrary,
she displayed extreme cordiality and attentiveness towards her father’s
fiancée. Thus Anna Andreevna was put in an extremely awkward position,
sensing with her subtle feminine flair that the slightest calumny against
Katerina Nikolaevna, before whom the prince also stood in awe, and now
more than ever, precisely because she so goodnaturedly and respectfully
allowed him to marry—the slightest calumny against her would offend all

his tender feelings and arouse mistrust of her in him and even, perhaps,
indignation. Thus it was in this field that the battle had gone on so far: the
two rivals were as if rivaling each other in delicacy and patience, and in the
end the prince no longer knew which of them to be more surprised at, and,
as is usual with all weak but tenderhearted people, ended by beginning to
suffer and blame himself alone for everything. His anguish, they said,
reached the point of illness; his nerves were indeed upset, and instead of
recovering in Tsarskoe, he was, as they assured me, ready to take to his bed.
Here I’ll note in parenthesis something I learned much later: that Bjoring
had supposedly proposed directly to Katerina Nikolaevna that they take the
old man abroad, persuading him to go by some sort of deceit, meanwhile
make it known privately in society that he had completely lost his reason,
and obtain a doctor’s certificate for it abroad. But Katerina Nikolaevna
wouldn’t do that for anything—so at least they maintained afterwards. She
supposedly rejected the plan with indignation. All this is only the most
distant rumor, but I believe it.
And so, when the matter had reached, so to speak, the point of ultimate
hopelessness, Anna Andreevna suddenly learns through Lambert that there
exists this letter in which the daughter had consulted a lawyer about the
means of declaring her father insane. Her vengeful and proud mind was
aroused in the highest degree. Remembering her former conversations with
me, and grasping a multitude of the tiniest circumstances, she could not
doubt the correctness of the information. Then, in that firm, inexorable
feminine heart, the plan for a bold stroke ripened irrepressibly. The plan
consisted in suddenly telling the prince everything outright, without
preliminaries and calumnies, frightening him, shocking him, pointing out
that the madhouse inevitably awaited him, and when he resisted, became
indignant, refused to believe it—showing him his daughter’s letter, as if to
say, “since there once was an intention of declaring him insane, so now it
was all the more likely, in order to prevent the marriage.” After which they
would take the frightened and crushed old man and move him to Petersburg
— straight to my apartment.

This was a terrible risk, but she trusted firmly in her power. Here,
departing from my story for a moment, I’ll say, running very far ahead, that
she was not deceived in the effect of her stroke; moreover, the effect went
beyond all her expectations. The news of this letter affected the old prince
maybe several times more strongly than she or any of us had supposed. I
never knew until then that the prince had known something about this letter
before; but, as is usual with all weak and timid people, he hadn’t believed
the rumor and had warded it off with all his might, so as to remain at peace;
what’s more, he blamed himself for his ignoble gullibility. I’ll also add that
the fact of the letter’s existence affected Katerina Nikolaevna, too,
incomparably more strongly than I myself then expected . . . In short, this
document turned out to be much more important than I myself, who was
carrying it in my pocket, had supposed. But here I’ve run too far ahead.
But why, I’ll be asked, to my apartment? Why move the prince to our
pathetic little rooms and maybe frighten him with our pathetic furnishings?
If it was impossible to go to his house (because there the whole thing could
be hindered at once), then why not to a special “rich” apartment, as Lambert
had suggested? But here lay the whole risk of Anna Andreevna’s
extraordinary step.
The main thing was to present the prince with the document immediately
on his arrival; but I wouldn’t hand over the document for anything. Since
there was no more time to lose, Anna Andreevna, trusting in her power,
ventured to start the business without the document, but by having the
prince delivered directly to me instead. Why? Precisely in order to catch me
in the same step as well, so to speak, and, as the saying goes, kill two birds
with one stone. She counted on affecting me as well with the jolt, the shock,
the unexpectedness. She reasoned that when I saw the old man at my place,
saw his fear, his helplessness, heard their joint entreaties, I’d give in and
produce the document! I admit her reckoning was cunning and clever, and
psychological—what’s more, she nearly succeeded . . . As for the old man,
Anna Andreevna led him on then, made him believe her, if only on her
word, by telling him outright that she would take him to me. I learned all
that afterwards. Even the news alone that the document was with me

destroyed in his timid heart the last doubts as to the verity of the fact—so
greatly did he love and respect me!
I’ll also note that Anna Andreevna herself didn’t doubt for a moment that
the document was still with me and that I hadn’t let it slip out of my hands.
Above all, she misunderstood my character and cynically counted on my
innocence, simpleheartedness, even sentimentality; and, on the other hand,
she supposed that, even if I had ventured to give the letter, for instance, to
Katerina Nikolaevna, then it could not have been otherwise than under
some special circumstances, and it was those circumstances she was
hastening to prevent by unexpectedness, a swoop, a stroke.
And, finally, she was confirmed in all this by Lambert. I’ve already said
that Lambert’s situation then was a most critical one: traitor as he was, he
wished with all his might to lure me away from Anna Andreevna, so that
the two of us together could sell the document to Mme. Akhmakov, which
for some reason he found more profitable. But since I wouldn’t hand over
the document for anything down to the last moment, he ultimately decided
even to throw in with Anna Andreevna, so as not to lose all profit, and
therefore he foisted his services on her with all his might, till the very last
hour, and I know that he even offered, if need be, to procure a priest . . . But
Anna Andreevna, with a scornful smile, asked him not to mention it.
Lambert seemed terribly crude to her and aroused her deepest loathing; but,
being prudent, she still accepted his services, which consisted, for instance,
in spying. Incidentally, I don’t know for certain even to this day whether
they bribed Pyotr Ippolitovich, my landlord, or not, and whether he
received at least something for his services, or simply joined their company
for the joy of intrigue; but he, too, spied on me, and his wife as well—that I
do know for certain.
The reader will now understand that, though I had been partly
forewarned, I really couldn’t have guessed that tomorrow or the day after I
would find the old prince in my apartment and in such circumstances. Nor
could I ever have imagined such boldness from Anna Andreevna! In words
you can say and imply anything you like; but to decide, to begin, and in fact
to carry through—no, that, I tell you, is character!

II
TO CONTINUE.
I woke up late the next morning, and had slept unusually soundly and
without dreams, I recall that with surprise, so that on awakening, I again felt
unusually cheerful morally, as if the whole previous day had never been. I
decided not to stop at mama’s but to go directly to the cemetery church,
with the intention of returning to mama’s apartment later, after the
ceremony, and not leaving her side for the rest of the day. I was firmly
convinced that in any case I would meet him today at mama’s, sooner or
later, but without fail.
Neither Alphonsinka nor the landlord had been at home for a long time. I
didn’t want to question the landlady about anything, and had generally
resolved to stop all contacts with them and even to move out of the
apartment as soon as possible; and therefore, the moment my coffee was
brought, I latched the door again. But suddenly there was a knock at the
door; to my surprise it turned out to be Trishatov.
I opened the door for him at once and very gladly asked him to come in,
but he didn’t want to come in.
“I’ll only say a couple of words from the threshold . . . or, no, I’ll come
in, because it seems one has to speak in whispers here; only I won’t sit
down. You’re looking at my wretched coat: it’s because Lambert took my
fur coat away.”
Indeed he was wearing a shabby old coat that was too long for him. He
stood before me somehow gloomy and sad, his hands in his pockets, and
without taking off his hat.
“I won’t sit down, I won’t sit down. Listen, Dolgoruky, I know nothing in
detail, but I do know that Lambert is preparing some treachery against you,
imminent and inevitable—and that is certain. So be careful. The
pockmarked one let it slip to me—remember the pockmarked one? But he

said nothing about what it has to do with, so I can’t say anything more. I
only came to warn you. Good-bye.”
“But do sit down, dear Trishatov! Though I’m in a hurry, I’m so glad to
see you . . .” I cried.
“I won’t sit, I won’t sit; but I’ll remember that you were glad to see me.
Eh, Dolgoruky, why deceive people: consciously, of my own free will, I’ve
agreed to do all sorts of nastiness, and such meanness that it’s shameful to
speak of it here with you. We’re with the pockmarked one now . . . Goodbye. I’m not worthy of sitting with you.”
“Come now, Trishatov, dear . . .”
“No, you see, Dolgoruky, I’m a bold fellow in front of everybody, and
I’ll start carousing now. Soon I’ll have a fur coat better than the old one
made for me, and I’ll go around driving trotters. But I’ll know within
myself that still I didn’t sit down here, because that’s how I’ve judged
myself, because I’m low compared to you. I’ll still find it pleasant to
remember it when I’m carousing dishonestly. Well, good-bye, good-bye; I
won’t offer you my hand; even Alphonsinka doesn’t take my hand. And
please don’t follow me, and don’t come to see me; we have a contract.”
The strange boy turned and left. I had no time then, but I resolved that I’d
be sure to seek him out quickly, as soon as our affairs were settled.
I won’t describe the rest of that morning, though there’s much that might
be recalled. Versilov wasn’t in church for the funeral, and, by the look of
them, one might have concluded that he wasn’t expected in church even
before the coffin was taken out. Mama prayed reverently and, apparently,
was wholly given over to prayer. Only Tatyana Pavlovna and Liza stood by
the coffin. But no, no, I won’t describe anything. After the burial, everyone
came back and sat down at the table, and once again, by the look of them, I
concluded that they didn’t expect him at the table either. When we got up
from the table, I went over to mama, embraced her warmly, and wished her
a happy birthday. After me, Liza did the same.

“Listen, brother,” Liza whispered on the sly, “they’re expecting him.”
“I guessed that, Liza, I can see it.”
“He’s sure to come.”
That means they have precise information, I thought, but I didn’t ask any
questions. Though I’m not describing my feelings, this whole riddle, despite
all my cheerfulness, again suddenly lay its weight like a stone on my heart.
We all sat down in the drawing room at the round table, around mama. Oh,
how I liked being with her then and looking at her! Mama suddenly asked
me to read something from the Gospel. I read a chapter from Luke. She
didn’t weep and wasn’t even very sad, but never had her face seemed so full
of spiritual meaning. An idea shone in her quiet gaze, but I was simply
unable to make out that she was anxiously expecting anything. The
conversation never flagged. There were many reminiscences about the
deceased; Tatyana Pavlovna told many stories about him that had been quite
unknown to me before. And generally, if it were all written down, many
curious things would be found. Even Tatyana Pavlovna seemed to have
completely changed her usual look; she was very quiet, very tender, and,
above all, also very calm, though she talked a lot to distract mama. But one
detail I remember only too well: mama was sitting on the sofa, and to the
left of the sofa, on a special round table, as if prepared for something, lay an
image—an old icon, with no casing, but just with crowns over the heads of
the saints, of whom there were two. This icon had belonged to Makar
Ivanovich—that I knew, and I also knew that the deceased had never parted
with this icon and considered it miracle-working. Tatyana Pavlovna glanced
at it several times.
“Listen, Sofya,” she said suddenly, changing the subject, “instead of the
icon lying here, wouldn’t it be better to stand it on a table against the wall
and light an icon lamp in front of it?”
“No, it’s better the way it is now,” said mama.
“You’re right. Otherwise it would seem too solemn . . .”

I understood nothing then, but the thing was that Makar Ivanovich had
long ago bequeathed this icon, verbally, to Andrei Petrovich, and mama was
now preparing to give it to him.
It was five o’clock in the afternoon; our conversation went on, and
suddenly I noticed as if a slight tremor in mama’s face; she quickly
straightened up and began listening, while Tatyana Pavlovna, who was
speaking just then, went on with what she was saying, not noticing
anything. I turned to the door at once and, a moment later, saw Andrei
Petrovich in the doorway. He had come in not from the porch, but by the
back stairs, through the kitchen and the corridor, and mama was the only
one of us who had heard his footsteps. I will now describe the whole insane
scene that followed, gesture by gesture, word by word. It was brief.
First of all, in his face, at least at first glance, I didn’t notice the slightest
change. He was dressed as always, that is, almost foppishly. In his hand was
a small but expensive bouquet of fresh flowers. He went over and gave it to
mama with a smile; she looked at him with timorous perplexity, but then
accepted the bouquet, and color suddenly enlivened her pale cheeks slightly,
and joy flashed in her eyes.
“I just knew you’d take it that way, Sonya,” he said. As we had all risen
when he came in, he went to the table, took Liza’s chair, which stood to
mama’s left, and, not noticing that he was occupying someone else’s place,
sat down on it. Thus he found himself directly in front of the little table on
which the icon lay.
“Greetings to you all. Sonya, I wanted to bring you this bouquet today
without fail, for your birthday, and therefore I didn’t appear at the funeral,
so as not to come to the dead man with a bouquet; and you didn’t expect me
at the funeral, I know. The old man surely won’t be angry over these
flowers, because he himself bequeathed us joy, isn’t it so? I think he’s here
in the room somewhere.”
Mama looked at him strangely; Tatyana Pavlovna seemed to cringe.
“Who’s here in the room?” she asked.

“The deceased. Never mind. You know that a man who doesn’t fully
believe in all these wonders is always the more inclined to prejudices . . .
But I’d better speak of the bouquet: how I got it here, I don’t know. Three
times on the way I wanted to drop it in the snow and trample it with my
feet.”
Mama shuddered.
“I wanted to terribly. Pity me, Sonya, and my poor head. But I wanted to,
because it’s too beautiful. Of anything in the world, what is more beautiful
than a flower? I was carrying it, and here there was snow and frost. Our
frost and flowers—what a contrast! However, that’s not what I’m getting at:
I wanted to crush it because it was beautiful. Sonya, I’m going to disappear
again now, but I’ll come back very soon, because it seems I’ll be afraid. I’ll
be afraid—and who will cure me of my fear, where will I get hold of an
angel like Sonya? . . . What’s this icon you have here? Ah, it’s the old
man’s, I remember. It came to him from his family, his forefathers; he never
parted with it all his life; I know, I remember, he bequeathed it to me; I
remember very well . . . and it seems it’s an Old Believers’ icon39 . . . let me
look at it.”
He took the icon in his hand, brought it to a candle, and studied it
intently, but after holding it for just a few seconds, he set it down on the
table in front of him. I wondered, but he uttered all these strange speeches
so unexpectedly that I could make no sense of them yet. All I remember is
that a morbid fear was coming into my heart. Mama’s fear was changing to
perplexity and compassion; before all, she saw just an unhappy man in him;
it happened that formerly as well he had sometimes spoken almost as
strangely as now. Liza suddenly became very pale for some reason and
strangely nodded her head towards him to me. But Tatyana Pavlovna was
the most frightened of all.
“What’s wrong with you, dearest Andrei Petrovich?” she spoke
cautiously.

“I really don’t know what’s wrong with me, my dear Tatyana Pavlovna.
Don’t worry, I still remember that you are Tatyana Pavlovna and that you
are dear. However, I’ve dropped in just for a minute; I’d like to say
something nice to Sonya, and I’m looking for the right word, though my
heart is filled with words which I’m unable to utter; truly, they’re all
somehow such strange words. You know, it seems to me as if I’m divided in
two,” he looked us all over with a terribly serious face and with the most
sincere communicativeness. “Truly, mentally divided in two, and I’m
terribly afraid of that. Just as if your double were standing next to you; you
yourself are intelligent and reasonable, but that one absolutely wants to do
something senseless next to you, and sometimes something very amusing,
and you suddenly notice that it’s you who want to do this amusing thing,
and, God knows why, that is, somehow unwillingly you want it, resisting
with all your might, you want it. I once knew a doctor who suddenly started
whistling in church at his father’s funeral. Truly, I was afraid to come to the
funeral today, because for some reason the absolute conviction came into
my head that I would suddenly start whistling or guffawing, like that
unfortunate doctor, who ended rather badly . . . And, truly, I don’t know
why I keep remembering that doctor today—so much so that there’s no
getting rid of him. You know, Sonya, here I’ve picked up this icon again”
(he had picked it up and was turning it in his hands), “and you know, I want
terribly much to smash it against the stove now, this second, on this very
corner. I’m sure it will split at once into two halves—no more, no less.”
Above all, he said all this without any air of pretense or even of some
sort of prank; he spoke quite simply, but that was the more terrible; and it
seemed he really was terribly afraid of something; I suddenly noticed that
his hands were trembling slightly.
“Andrei Petrovich!” mama cried, clasping her hands.
“Let it alone, let the icon alone, Andrei Petrovich, put it down!” Tatyana
Pavlovna jumped up. “Get undressed and go to bed. Arkady, fetch the
doctor!”

“But no . . . but no, why are you fussing so?” he said softly, looking
around at us all with an intent gaze. Then he suddenly put both elbows on
the table and rested his head in his hands.
“I’m frightening you, but I tell you what, my friends: indulge me a little,
sit down again and be more calm, all of you—at least for one minute!
Sonya, that’s not at all what I came here to talk about; I came to tell you
something, but quite different. Good-bye, Sonya, I’m setting out on my
wanderings again, as I’ve set out from you several times already . . . Well,
of course, someday I’ll come back to you, in this sense you’re inevitable. To
whom am I to come when it’s all over? Believe me, Sonya, I’ve come to
you now as to an angel, and not at all as to an enemy: what sort of enemy,
what sort of enemy are you to me! Don’t think it’s in order to break this
icon, because, do you know, Sonya, I still want to break it . . .”
When Tatyana Pavlovna had cried before then, “Let the icon alone!”—
she had snatched the image out of his hands and was holding it herself.
Suddenly, at his last words, he quickly jumped up, instantly snatched the
icon out of Tatyana’s hands, and, swinging ferociously, smashed it with all
his might against the corner of the tile stove. The icon split exactly into two
pieces . . . He suddenly turned to us, and his pale face suddenly turned all
red, almost purple, and every feature of his face trembled and twitched:
“Don’t take it as an allegory, Sonya, it’s not Makar’s inheritance I’ve
broken, I only did it in order to break . . . And even so I’ll come back to
you, my last angel! But, anyhow, why not take it as an allegory; it certainly
must have been! . . .”
And he suddenly hurried out of the room, again through the kitchen
(where he had left his fur coat and hat). I won’t describe in detail what
happened with mama: scared to death, she stood with her hands raised and
clasped above her and suddenly called out after him:
“Andrei Petrovich, come back at least to say good-bye, dear!”
“He’ll come, Sofya, he’ll come! Don’t worry!” Tatyana cried, trembling
all over in a terrible fit of anger, ferocious anger. “You heard, he himself

promised to come back! Let the madcap run loose for one last time. He’ll
get old, and who indeed will nurse him then, when he’s broken down,
except you, his old nurse? He says it straight out himself, without shame . .
.”
As for us, Liza was in a faint. I was about to run after him, but then I
rushed to mama. I put my arms around her and held her in my embrace.
Lukerya came running with a glass of water for Liza. But mama soon
recovered; she sank onto the sofa, covered her face with her hands, and
wept.
“But no, but no . . . catch up with him!” Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly cried
out with all her might, as if coming to her senses. “Go . . . go . . . catch up
with him, don’t let him get a step ahead of you—go, go!” She was pulling
me away from mama with all her might. “Ah, I’ll run myself !”
“Arkasha, ah, run after him quickly!” mama suddenly cried as well.
I ran out headlong, also through the kitchen and the yard, but he was
nowhere to be seen. Far down the sidewalk I made out the black figures of
passersby in the darkness; I started running after them and, catching up with
them, looked each one in the face as I ran past. In this way I ran as far as the
intersection.
“You don’t get angry with madmen,” suddenly flashed in my head, “but
Tatyana was ferociously angry with him, which means he’s not mad at all . .
.” Oh, I kept thinking that it was an allegory and that he absolutely wanted
to have done with something, as with that icon, and to show it to us, to
mama, to everybody. But the “double” was also undoubtedly next to him; of
that there was no doubt at all . . .

III
HE DIDN’T TURN up anywhere, however, and there was no point in
running to his place; it was hard to imagine that he had just simply gone

home. Suddenly a thought began to gleam before me, and I rushed headlong
to Anna Andreevna’s.
Anna Andreevna had already returned, and I was admitted at once. I went
in, controlling myself as far as I could. Without sitting down, I told her
directly about the scene that had just taken place, that is, precisely about the
“double.” I will never forget nor forgive her the greedy but mercilessly calm
and self-assured curiosity with which she listened to me, also without
sitting down.
“Where is he? Maybe you know?” I concluded insistently. “Tatyana
Pavlovna sent me to you yesterday . . .”
“I sent for you yesterday. Yesterday he was in Tsarskoe, and he was here
as well. And now,” she glanced at the clock, “now it’s seven o’clock . . .
That means he’s probably at home.”
“I see you know everything—so speak, speak!” I cried.
“I know a good deal, but I don’t know everything. Of course, there’s no
need to conceal it from you . . .” She measured me with a strange look,
smiling and as if reflecting. “Yesterday morning, in response to Katerina
Nikolaevna’s letter, he made her a formal proposal of marriage.”
“That’s not true!” I goggled my eyes.
“The letter went through my hands; I myself took it to her, unopened.
This time he acted ‘chivalrously’ and concealed nothing from me.”
“Anna Andreevna, I don’t understand anything!”
“Of course, it’s hard to understand, but it’s like a gambler who throws his
last gold coin on the table and has a revolver ready in his pocket—that’s the
meaning of his proposal. The chances are nine out of ten that she won’t
accept his proposal; but it means that he’s counting on that one-tenth
chance, and, I confess, that’s very curious, in my opinion, though . . .

though there might also be frenzy in it, that same ‘double,’ as you said so
well just now.”
“And you laugh? And how can I believe that the letter was conveyed
through you? Aren’t you her father’s fiancée? Spare me, Anna Andreevna!”
“He asked me to sacrifice my destiny to his happiness, though he didn’t
really ask; it was all done quite silently, I merely read it all in his eyes. Ah,
my God, what more do you want? Didn’t he go to your mother in
Königsberg to ask her permission to marry Mme. Akhmakov’s
stepdaughter? That goes very well with the way he chose me yesterday as
his representative and confidante.”
She was slightly pale. But her calmness only reinforced her sarcasm. Oh,
I forgave her much during that minute when I gradually came to grasp the
matter. For a minute I thought it over; she waited in silence.
“You know,” I smiled suddenly, “you conveyed the letter, because for
you there was no risk, because there will be no marriage, but what about
him? And her, finally? Of course, she’ll turn down his proposal, and then . .
. what may happen then? Where is he now, Anna Andreevna?” I cried.
“Here every minute is precious, any minute there may be trouble!”
“He’s at home, I told you. In his letter to Katerina Nikolaevna yesterday,
which I conveyed, he asked her, in any event, for a meeting at his
apartment, today, at exactly seven o’clock in the evening. She gave her
promise.”
“She’ll go to his apartment? How is it possible?”
“Why not? The apartment belongs to Nastasya Egorovna; they both
could very well meet there as her guests . . .”
“But she’s afraid of him . . . he may kill her!”
Anna Andreevna only smiled.

“Katerina Nikolaevna, despite all her fear, which I’ve noticed in her
myself, has always nursed, since former times, a certain reverence and awe
for the nobility of Andrei Petrovich’s principles and the loftiness of his
mind. She’s trusting herself to him this time so as to have done with him
forever. In his letter he gave her his most solemn, most chivalrous word that
she had nothing to fear . . . In short, I don’t remember the terms of his letter,
but she’s trusting herself . . . so to speak, for the last time . . . and, so to
speak, responding with the most heroic feelings. There may be some sort of
chivalrous struggle here on both sides.”
“But the double, the double!” I exclaimed. “He really has lost his mind!”
“On giving her word yesterday that she would come to meet him,
Katerina Nikolaevna probably didn’t suppose the possibility of such a
case.”
I suddenly turned and broke into a run . . . To him, to them, of course!
But I came back from the front room for a second.
“Maybe that’s just what you want, that he should kill her!” I cried, and
ran out of the house.
Though I was trembling all over as if in a fit, I entered the apartment
silently, through the kitchen, and asked in a whisper to have Nastasya
Egorovna come out to me; but she came out at once herself and silently
fixed me with a terribly questioning look.
“He’s not at home, sir.”
But I explained to her directly and precisely, in a quick whisper, that I
knew everything from Anna Andreevna and had just come from her.
“Where are they, Nastasya Egorovna?”
“They’re in the drawing room, sir, where you were sitting two days ago,
at the table . . .”

“Let me in there, Nastasya Egorovna!”
“How is that possible, sir?”
“Not there, but the room next to it. Nastasya Egorovna, it may be that
Anna Andreevna herself wants it. If she didn’t, she wouldn’t have told me
they were here. They won’t hear me . . . she wants it herself . . .”
“And what if she doesn’t?” Nastasya Egorovna kept her gaze fixed on
me.
“Nastasya Egorovna, I remember your Olya . . . let me in.”
Her lips and chin suddenly began to tremble:
“Dear heart, maybe for Olya’s sake . . . for your feeling . . . Don’t
abandon Anna Andreevna, dear heart! You won’t abandon her, eh? You
won’t?”
“I won’t!”
“Give me your great word, then, that you won’t rush in on them and start
shouting, if I put you in there?”
“I swear on my honor, Nastasya Egorovna!”
She took hold of my frock coat, let me into the dark room adjacent to the
one they were sitting in, led me barely audibly over the soft rug to the door,
placed me just at the lowered portière and, lifting a tiny corner of the
portière, showed me both of them.
I stayed and she left. Naturally, I stayed. I realized that I was
eavesdropping, eavesdropping on other people’s secrets, but I stayed. How
could I not stay—what of the double? Hadn’t he smashed an icon before my
eyes?

IV

THEY WERE SITTING opposite each other at the same table at which he
and I had drunk wine yesterday to his “resurrection.” I could see their faces
very well. She was in a simple black dress, beautiful, and apparently calm,
as always. He was speaking, and she was listening to him with extreme and
obliging attention. Maybe a certain timidity could be seen in her. He was
terribly agitated. I arrived when the conversation had already begun, and
therefore understood nothing for a certain time. I remember she suddenly
asked:
“And I was the cause?”
“No, it was I who was the cause,” he replied, “and you were only
blamelessly to blame. Do you know that one can be blamelessly to blame?
That is the most unpardonable blame, and it almost always gets punished,”
he added, laughing strangely. “And I really thought for a moment that I had
quite forgotten you, and I quite laughed at my stupid passion . . . but you
know that. And, anyhow, what do I care about the man you’re about to
marry? I proposed to you yesterday, forgive me for that, it was absurd, and
yet there was no alternative . . . what could I have done except that
absurdity? I don’t know . . .”
He laughed perplexedly at these words, suddenly raising his eyes to her;
till that time he had spoken as if looking away. If I had been in her place, I
would have been frightened by that laughter, I could feel it. He suddenly got
up from his chair.
“Tell me, how could you have agreed to come here?” he asked suddenly,
as if remembering the main thing. “My invitation and my whole letter were
absurd . . . Wait, I may still guess how it happened that you agreed to come,
but—why have you come?—that’s the question. Can it be that you came
only out of fear?”
“I came to see you,” she said, studying him with timid wariness. They
were both silent for half a minute. Versilov lowered himself onto the chair
again and began in a meek but deeply moved, almost trembling voice:

“I haven’t seen you for a terribly long time, Katerina Nikolaevna, so long
that I almost considered it impossible ever to be sitting beside you as I am
now, looking into your face and listening to your voice . . . For two years
we haven’t seen each other, for two years we haven’t talked. I didn’t think
I’d ever be talking to you. Well, so be it, what’s past is past, and what there
is now will vanish tomorrow like smoke—so be it! I accept, because once
again there’s no alternative, but don’t just go away now for nothing,” he
suddenly added almost beseechingly, “since you’ve done me the charity of
coming, don’t go away for nothing: answer me one question!”
“What question?”
“You and I will never see each other again and—what is it to you? Tell
me the truth once and for all, to the one question intelligent people never
ask: did you ever love me, or was I . . . mistaken?”
She blushed.
“I did love you,” she said.
I was just waiting for her to say that—oh, the truthful one, oh, the sincere
one, oh, the honest one!
“And now?” he continued.
“Now I don’t.”
“And you laugh?”
“No, I just smiled inadvertently, because I knew you’d ask, ‘And now?’
And I smiled because . . . because when you guess something, you always
smile . . .”
It was even strange. I had never yet seen her so wary, even almost timid,
and so abashed. He was devouring her with his eyes.
“I know you don’t love me . . . and—you don’t love me at all?”

“Maybe I don’t love you at all. I don’t love you,” she added firmly, not
smiling now and not blushing. “Yes, I did love you, but not for long. I very
soon stopped loving you then . . .”
“I know, I know, you saw it wasn’t what you wanted, but . . . what do you
want? Explain it to me once more . . .”
“Did I already explain it to you sometime? What I want? But I’m a most
ordinary woman; I’m a calm woman, I like . . . I like merry people.”
“Merry?”
“You see, I don’t even know how to speak with you. It seems to me that
if you could love me less, then I could come to love you,” she again smiled
timidly. The fullest sincerity flashed in her reply, and could she possibly not
have understood that her reply was the most definitive formula of their
relations, which explained and resolved everything? Oh, how he must have
understood that! But he looked at her and smiled strangely.
“Is Bjoring merry?” he went on asking.
“Oh, he shouldn’t trouble you at all,” she answered with a certain haste.
“I’m marrying him only because with him it will be calmest for me. My
soul will remain entirely my own.”
“They say you’ve again come to like society, the world?”
“Not society. I know that in our society there’s the same disorder as
everywhere; but the external forms are still beautiful, so that if one lives
only so as to pass by, it’s better here than anywhere else.”
“I’ve begun hearing the word ‘disorder’ quite often. Were you also
frightened then by my disorder, the chains, the ideas, the stupidities?”
“No, it wasn’t quite that . . .”
“Then what was it? For God’s sake, say it all straight out.”

“Well, I’ll tell you straight out, because I consider you of the greatest
intelligence . . . I always thought there was something ridiculous in you.”
Having said that, she suddenly blushed, as if realizing that she had done
something extremely imprudent.
“I can forgive you a great deal for telling me that,” he said strangely.
“I didn’t finish,” she hurried on, turning more red. “It’s I who am
ridiculous . . . for talking to you like a fool.”
“No, you’re not ridiculous, you’re merely a depraved society woman!”
He turned terribly pale. “I also didn’t finish earlier, when I asked you why
you came. Would you like me to finish? There exists a certain letter, a
document, and you are terribly afraid of it, because your father, with that
letter in his hands, might curse you while he lives and legally deprive you
of your inheritance in his will. You are afraid of that letter, and you have
come for that letter,” he spoke nearly trembling all over, and his teeth even
almost chattering. She listened to him with a wistful and pained expression
on her face.
“I know that you can cause me considerable unpleasantness,” she said, as
if warding off his words, “but I’ve come not so much to persuade you not to
persecute me, as to see you yourself. I’ve even wished very much to meet
you for a long time now, I myself . . . But I find you the same as you were
before,” she suddenly added, as if carried away by a particular and decisive
thought and even by some strange and sudden feeling.
“And you hoped to see me different? This—after that letter of mine about
your depravity? Tell me, did you come here without any fear?”
“I came because I once loved you; but, you know, I beg you, please,
don’t threaten me with anything while we’re together now, don’t remind me
of my bad thoughts and feelings. If you could talk to me about something
else, I’d be very glad. Let there be threats afterwards, but something
different now . . . I truly came to see and hear you for a moment. Well, but
if you can’t, then kill me straight out, only don’t threaten me and don’t

torture yourself before me,” she concluded, looking at him in strange
expectation, as if she really supposed he might kill her. He got up from his
chair again and, looking at her with an ardent gaze, said firmly:
“You will leave here without the slightest offense.”
“Ah, yes, your word of honor!” she smiled.
“No, not only because I gave my word of honor in the letter, but because
I want to and shall think about you all night . . .”
“To torment yourself ?”
“I always imagine you when I’m alone. All I do is talk to you. I go into
slums and dens and, as a contrast, you appear before me at once. But you
always laugh at me, as now . . .” he said as if beside himself.
“Never, never have I laughed at you!” she exclaimed in a deeply moved
voice and as if with the greatest compassion showing on her face. “If I
came, I tried as hard as I could to do it so as not to hurt you in any way,”
she suddenly added. “I came here to tell you that I almost love you . . .
Forgive me, I may not have said it right,” she added hastily.
He laughed.
“What makes you unable to pretend? What makes you such a simpleton,
what makes you unlike everyone else . . . Well, how can you say to a man
you’re driving away, ‘I almost love you’?”
“I just didn’t know how to put it,” she hurried on, “I didn’t say it right;
it’s because I’ve always been abashed in your presence and have never
known how to speak, ever since our first meeting. And if I used the wrong
words when I said I ‘almost love you,’ in my thought it was almost so—
that’s why I said it, though I love you with that . . . well, that general love
with which one loves everyone and which there’s no shame in confessing . .
.”

He listened silently, not taking his ardent gaze off her.
“I, of course, offend you,” he went on as if beside himself. “This must
indeed be what they call passion . . . I know one thing, that with you I’m
finished; without you also. It’s all the same with you or without you,
wherever you are, you’re always with me. I also know that I can hate you
very much, more than I love you . . . However, I’ve long ceased thinking of
anything—it’s all the same to me. I’m only sorry that I love a woman like
you . . .”
His voice faltered; he went on as if breathless:
“What’s the matter? You find what I’m saying wild?” He smiled a pale
smile. “I think that, if only it would attract you, I could stand on one leg on
a pillar somewhere for thirty years . . . I see you pity me, your face says,
‘I’d love you if I could, but I can’t . . .’ Yes? Never mind, I have no pride.
I’m ready, like a beggar, to take any charity from you—any . . . do you
hear? . . . What pride can a beggar have?”
She got up and went over to him.
“My friend!” she said, touching his shoulder with her hand and with
inexpressible feeling in her face. “I cannot listen to such words! I’ll think of
you all my life as of the most precious of men, as of the greatest of hearts,
as of something sacred out of all that I can respect and love. Andrei
Petrovich, understand my words: there’s something I came for now, dear
man, dear before and now! I’ll never forget how you shook my mind during
our first meetings. Let’s part as friends, and you will be my most serious
and most dear thought in all my life!”
“‘Let’s part and then I’ll love you,’ I’ll love you, only let’s part. Listen,”
he said, quite pale, “give me more charity: don’t love me, don’t live with
me, let’s never see each other; I’ll be your slave, if you call me, I’ll vanish
instantly if you don’t want to see or hear me, only . . . only don’t marry
anyone! ”

My heart was wrung painfully when I heard such words. This naïvely
humiliating request was the more pathetic, it pierced the heart the more
strongly, for being so naked and impossible. Yes, of course, he was asking
for charity! Well, but could he think she’d agree? And yet he stooped to the
attempt: he attempted to ask! This last degree of dispiritedness was
unbearable to see. All the features of her face suddenly twisted as if with
pain; but before she had time to say a word, he suddenly came to his senses:
“I’ll exterminate you!” he said suddenly in a strange, distorted voice, not
his own.
But her answer was also strange, also in an unexpected voice, not at all
her own:
“If I were to give you charity,” she suddenly said firmly, “you’d revenge
yourself on me for it afterwards still worse than you’re threatening now,
because you’d never forget that you stood before me as such a beggar . . . I
cannot listen to threats from you!” she concluded almost with indignation,
looking at him all but in defiance.
“‘Threats from you,’ that is, from such a beggar! I was joking,” he said
softly, smiling. “I won’t do anything to you, don’t be afraid, go now . . . and
I’ll do all I can to send you that document—only go, go! I wrote you a
stupid letter, and you responded to the stupid letter and came—we’re quits.
Go this way,” he pointed to the door (she was about to pass through the
room where I was standing behind the portière).
“Forgive me if you can,” she stopped in the doorway.
“Well, what if we meet as quite good friends someday and remember this
scene with bright laughter?” he said suddenly; but all the features of his
face trembled, as in a man overcome by a fit.
“Oh, God grant it!” she cried, pressing her hands together before her, but
peering timorously into his face and as if trying to guess what he meant to
say.

“Go. Much sense there is in the two of us, but you . . . Oh, you’re my
kind of person! I wrote a crazy letter, and you agreed to come and say that
you ‘almost love me.’ No, you and I—we’re people of the same madness!
Always be mad like that, don’t change, and we’ll meet as friends—that I
predict to you, I swear it to you!”
“And then I’ll certainly love you, because I feel it even now!” The
woman in her couldn’t help herself and threw him these last words from the
threshold.
She went out. I hastily and inaudibly moved to the kitchen and, almost
without looking at Nastasya Egorovna, who was waiting for me, set off
down the back stairs and across the courtyard to the street. But I only had
time to see her get into a hired carriage that was waiting for her by the
porch. I ran down the street.

Chapter Eleven
I
I WENT RUNNING to Lambert. Oh, how I wish I could give a semblance
of logic and seek out the least bit of common sense in my acts that evening
and all that night, but even now, when I can grasp everything, I’m in no
way able to present the matter in proper and clear connection. There was a
feeling here, or, better, a whole chaos of feelings, among which I was
naturally bound to get lost. True, there was one chiefest feeling that
overwhelmed me and commanded everything, but . . . need I confess it?
The more so as I’m not certain . . .
I ran to Lambert, naturally, beside myself. I even frightened him and
Alphonsinka at first. I’ve always noticed that the most lost, most crapulous
Frenchmen are exceedingly attached, in their domestic life, to some sort of
bourgeois order, to some sort of most prosaic daily routine of life
established once and for all. However, Lambert very soon realized that
something had happened and went into raptures, seeing me finally at his
place, finally possessing me. That was all he thought about, day and night,
those days! Oh, how he needed me! And now, when he had already lost all
hope, I suddenly come on my own, and in such madness—precisely the
state he needed.
“Wine, Lambert!” I shouted. “Let’s drink, let’s storm it up. Alphonsina,
where’s your guitar?”
I won’t describe the scene—it’s superfluous. We drank, and I told him
everything, everything. He listened greedily. I—and I was the first—
directly suggested a plot to him, a conflagration. First of all, we must invite
Katerina Nikolaevna here by letter . . .
“That can be done,” Lambert confirmed, snatching at every word I said.

Second, to be convincing, we must send a complete copy of her
“document” with the letter, so that she can see straight off that she’s not
being deceived.
“So we should, so we must!” Lambert confirmed, constantly exchanging
glances with Alphonsinka.
Third, the one to invite her must be Lambert himself, on his own, in the
manner of some unknown person just arrived from Moscow, and I must
bring Versilov . . .
“Versilov can be done . . .” Lambert confirmed.
“Must be, not can be!” I cried. “It’s necessary! The whole thing’s being
done for him!” I explained, sipping gulp after gulp from my glass. (All
three of us were drinking, but it seems I alone drank the whole bottle of
champagne, while they only made a show of it.) “Versilov and I will sit in
the other room (we have to secure the other room, Lambert!), and when she
suddenly agrees to everything—to the ransom in cash and to the other
ransom, because they’re all mean—then Versilov and I will come out and
catch her in all her meanness, and Versilov, seeing how loathsome she is,
will be cured at once and will kick her out. But we need to have Bjoring
there as well, so that he, too, can have a look at her!” I added in a frenzy.
“No, we don’t need Bjoring,” Lambert observed.
“We do, we do!” I yelled again. “You understand nothing, Lambert,
because you’re stupid! On the contrary, let the scandal spread through high
society—that way we’ll be revenged both on high society and on her, and
let her be punished! She’ll give you a promissory note, Lambert . . . I don’t
need money, I spit on money; you’ll stoop down to pick it up and put it in
your pocket along with my spit, but instead I will crush her!”
“Yes, yes,” Lambert kept confirming, “it’s all as you . . .” He kept
exchanging glances with Alphonsinka.

“Lambert! She’s terribly in awe of Versilov; I’ve just been convinced of
it,” I babbled to him.
“It’s good that you spied it all out. I never supposed you were such a spy
and had so much sense!” He said that in order to flatter me.
“Lies, Frenchman, I’m not a spy, but there is a lot of sense in me! And
you know, Lambert, she loves him!” I went on, trying with all my might to
speak myself out. “But she won’t marry him, because Bjoring’s an officer
of the guards and Versilov is only a magnanimous man and friend of
mankind, a comical person, in their opinion, and nothing more! Oh, she
understands this passion and enjoys it, she flirts, she entices, but she won’t
marry him! She’s a woman, she’s a serpent! Every woman is a serpent, and
every serpent is a woman! He’s got to be cured; he’s got to have the scales
torn off. Let him see what she’s like, and he’ll be cured. I’ll bring him to
you, Lambert!”
“So you must,” Lambert kept confirming, pouring more for me every
minute.
Above all, he simply trembled over not angering me with something,
over not contradicting me, and getting me to drink more. This was so crude
and obvious that even I couldn’t help noticing it then. But I myself couldn’t
leave for anything; I kept drinking and talking, and I wanted terribly to
speak myself out finally. When Lambert went for another bottle,
Alphonsinka played some Spanish motif on the guitar; I almost burst into
tears.
“Lambert, you don’t know all!” I exclaimed with deep feeling. “This man
absolutely must be saved, because he’s surrounded by . . . sorcery. If she
married him, the next morning, after the first night, he’d kick her out . . .
because that does happen. Because such violent, wild love works like a fit,
like a deadly noose, like an illness, and—as soon as you reach satisfaction
—the scales fall at once and the opposite feeling appears: disgust and
hatred, the wish to exterminate, to crush. Do you know the story of
Abishag,40 Lambert, have you read it?”

“No, I don’t recall. A novel?” murmured Lambert.
“Oh, you know nothing, Lambert! You’re terribly, terribly uneducated . . .
but I spit on that. It makes no difference. Oh, he loves mama; he kissed her
portrait; he’ll drive the other woman out the next morning and go to mama
himself; but it will be too late, and that’s why we must save him now . . .”
Towards the end I started weeping bitterly; but I still went on talking, and
I drank terribly much. The most characteristic feature consisted in the fact
that Lambert, all evening, never once asked about the “document,” that is,
where it was. That is, that I should show it to him, lay it on the table. What,
it seems, would have been more natural than to ask about it, when we were
arranging to act together? Another feature: we only said it must be done,
that we must do “it” without fail, but where it would be, how and when—of
that we also didn’t say a word! He only yessed me and exchanged glances
with Alphonsinka—nothing more! Of course, I couldn’t put anything
together then, but all the same I remember it.
I ended by falling asleep on his sofa without undressing. I slept for a very
long time and woke up very late. I remember that, on waking up, I lay for
some time on the sofa, as if stunned, trying to remember and put things
together and pretending I was still asleep. But Lambert turned out not to be
in the room: he had left. It was going on ten o’clock; the stove was burning
and crackling, exactly as then, after that night, when I found myself at
Lambert’s for the first time. But Alphonsinka was keeping watch on me
from behind the screen. I noticed it at once, because she peeked out a
couple of times and checked on me, but I closed my eyes each time and
pretended I was still asleep. I did that because I was crushed and had to
make sense of my situation. I felt with horror the whole absurdity and
loathsomeness of my night’s confession to Lambert, my complicity with
him, my mistake in having run to him! But, thank God, the document still
remained with me, was still sewn up in my side pocket; I felt it with my
hand—it was there! So all I had to do right then was jump up and run away,
and there was no point in being ashamed of Lambert afterwards; Lambert
wasn’t worth it.

But I was also ashamed of myself! I was my own judge, and—God, what
there was in my soul! But I’m not going to describe that infernal,
unbearable feeling and that consciousness of filth and vileness. But all the
same I must confess it, because it seems the time has come for that. It
should be pointed out in my notes. And so, let it be known that I wanted to
disgrace her and witness her giving the ransom to Lambert (oh, baseness!),
not because I wanted to save the mad Versilov and return him to mama, but
because . . . maybe I myself was in love with her, in love and jealous!
Jealous of whom? Of Bjoring? Of Versilov? Of all those she would look at
or talk with at a ball, while I stood in the corner, ashamed of myself? . . .
Oh, unseemliness!
In short, I don’t know whom I was jealous of; I only felt and had become
convinced during the past evening, like two times two, that for me she was
lost, that this woman would spurn and deride me for my falseness and
absurdity. She was truthful and honest, while I—I was a spy, and with
documents!
All this I’ve kept hidden in my heart ever since, but now the time has
come, and I’m drawing the bottom line. But, once again and for the last
time: maybe I’ve heaped lies on myself by a whole half or even seventyfive percent! That night I hated her, like a man beside himself, and later like
a raging drunkard. I’ve already said it was a chaos of feelings and
sensations in which I myself could make out nothing. But, all the same,
they had to be spoken out, because at least a part of these feelings was
certainly there.
With irrepressible disgust and with the irrepressible intention of
smoothing everything over, I suddenly jumped up from the sofa; but just as
I jumped up, Alphonsinka instantly jumped out. I grabbed my coat and hat,
and told her to tell Lambert that I was raving the night before, that I had
slandered the woman, that I was deliberately joking, and that Lambert
should never dare come to me . . . All this I brought out anyhow,
haphazardly, hastily, in French, and, of course, awfully unclearly, but, to my
surprise, Alphonsinka understood it all terribly well. But, what was most
surprising, she was even as if glad of something.

“Oui, oui,” she agreed with me, “c’est une honte! Une dame . . . Oh, vous
êtes généreux, vous! Soyez tranquille, je ferai voir raison à Lambert . . .”99
So that even at that moment I should have been thrown into perplexity,
seeing such an unexpected turnabout in her feelings, which meant, perhaps,
in Lambert’s as well. I went out silently, however; my soul was troubled
and I wasn’t reasoning well. Oh, afterwards I considered it all, but by then it
was too late! Oh, what an infernal machination came out here! I’ll stop and
explain everything beforehand; otherwise it will be impossible for the
reader to understand.
The thing was that, back at my first meeting with Lambert, while I was
thawing out in his apartment, I had murmured to him, like a fool, that the
document was sewn up in my pocket. Then I had suddenly fallen asleep for
a while on the sofa in the corner, and Lambert had immediately felt my
pocket then and made sure that a piece of paper was actually sewn up in it.
Several times later he had made sure that the paper was still there: so, for
instance, during our dinner at the Tartars’, I remember he purposely put his
arm around my waist several times. Realizing, finally, how important this
paper was, he put together his own totally particular plan, which I never
supposed he had. Like a fool, I imagined all the while that he was so
persistently inviting me to his place solely to persuade me to join company
with him and not act otherwise than together. But, alas! he invited me for
something quite different! He invited me in order to get me dead drunk and,
when I was sprawled out there, unconscious and snoring, to cut my pocket
open and take possession of the document. That’s just what he and
Alphonsinka did that night; it was Alphonsinka who cut open the pocket.
Having taken out the letter, her letter, my Moscow document, they took a
simple sheet of note paper of the same size, put it into the cut pocket, and
sewed it up again as if nothing had happened, so that I wouldn’t notice
anything. Alphonsinka also did the sewing up. And I, almost to the very
end, I—for a whole day and a half—went on thinking that I was in
possession of the secret, and that Katerina Nikolaevna’s destiny was still in
my hands!

A last word: this theft of the document was the cause of it all, all the
remaining misfortunes!

II
NOW COME THE last twenty-four hours of my notes, and I’m at the final
end!
It was, I think, around half-past ten when, agitated and, as far as I
remember, somehow strangely distracted, but with a definitive resolve in
my heart, I came trudging to my apartment. I was not in a hurry, I already
knew how I was going to act. And suddenly, just as I entered our corridor, I
understood at once that a new calamity had befallen and an extraordinary
complication of matters had occurred: the old prince, having just been
brought from Tsarskoe Selo, was in our apartment, and Anna Andreevna
was with him!
He had been put not in my room, but in the two rooms next to mine,
which belonged to the landlord. The day before, as it turned out, certain
changes and embellishments, though of a minimal sort, had been carried out
in these rooms. The landlord and his wife had moved to the tiny closet
occupied by the fussy pockmarked tenant whom I have mentioned before,
and the pockmarked tenant had been confiscated for the time being—I don’t
know where to.
I was met by the landlord, who at once darted into my room. He did not
have the same resolute air as the day before, but he was in an
extraordinarily agitated state, equal, so to speak, to the event. I said nothing
to him, but went to the corner and, clutching my head with my hands, stood
there for about a minute. At first he thought I was “putting it on,” but in the
end he couldn’t stand it and became alarmed.
“Is anything wrong?” he murmured. “I’ve been waiting to ask you,” he
added, seeing that I didn’t answer, “whether you wouldn’t like to open this
door, for direct communication with the prince’s rooms . . . rather than
through the corridor?” He was pointing to the side door, which was always

locked, and which communicated with his own rooms and now, therefore,
with the prince’s quarters.
“Look here, Pyotr Ippolitovich,” I addressed him with a stern air, “I
humbly beg you to go and invite Anna Andreevna here to my room for a
talk. Have they been here long?”
“Must be nearly an hour.”
“So go.”
He went and brought back the strange reply that Anna Andreevna and
Prince Nikolai Ivanovich were impatiently awaiting me in their rooms—
meaning that Anna Andreevna did not wish to come. I straightened and
cleaned my frock coat, which had become wrinkled during the night,
washed, combed my hair, all of that unhurriedly, and, aware of how
necessary it was to be cautious, went to see the old man.
The prince was sitting on the sofa at a round table, and Anna Andreevna
was preparing tea for him in another corner, at another table covered with a
tablecloth, on which the landlord’s samovar, polished as it had never been
before, was boiling. I came in with the same stern look on my face, and the
old man, instantly noticing it, gave a start, and the smile on his face quickly
gave way to decided alarm. But I couldn’t keep it up, laughed at once, and
held out my arms to him. The poor man simply threw himself into my
embrace.
Unquestionably, I realized at once whom I was dealing with. First of all,
it became as clear to me as two times two that, during the time since I last
saw him, they had made the old man, who had even been almost hale and
still at least somewhat sensible and with a certain character, into a sort of
mummy, a sort of perfect child, fearful and mistrustful. I will add that he
knew perfectly well why he had been brought here, and that everything had
happened exactly as I explained above, when I ran ahead of myself. He was
suddenly struck, broken, crushed by the news of his daughter’s betrayal and
of the madhouse. He had allowed himself to be brought, so frightened that
he scarcely knew what he was doing. He had been told that I was in

possession of the secret, and held the key to the ultimate solution. I’ll say
beforehand: it was this ultimate solution and key that he feared more than
anything in the world. He expected that I’d just walk in there with some sort
of sentence on my forehead and a paper in my hand, and he was awfully
glad that I was prepared meanwhile to laugh and chatter about other things.
When we embraced, he wept. I confess, I wept a bit, too. But I suddenly felt
very sorry for him . . . Alphonsinka’s little dog went off into a high, belllike barking and strained towards me from the sofa. He hadn’t parted from
this tiny dog since the day he acquired it, and even slept with it.
“Oh, je disais qu’il a du coeur!”100 he exclaimed, pointing at me to Anna
Andreevna.
“But how you’ve improved, Prince, what a fine, fresh, healthy look you
have!” I observed. Alas! it was all quite the opposite: this was a mummy,
and I only said it to encourage him.
“N’est-cepas, n’est-cepas?”101 he repeated joyfully. “Oh, my health has
improved astonishingly.”
“Anyhow, have your tea, and if you offer me a cup, I’ll drink with you.”
“Marvelous! ‘Let us drink and enjoy . . .’ or how does the poem go?
Anna Andreevna, give him tea, il prend toujours par les sentiments102 . . .
give us tea, my dear.”
Anna Andreevna served us tea, but suddenly turned to me and began with
extreme solemnity:
“Arkady Makarovich, both of us, I and my benefactor, Prince Nikolai
Ivanovich, have taken refuge with you. I consider that we have come to
you, to you alone, and we are both asking you for shelter. Remember that
almost the whole destiny of this saintly, this most noble and offended man
is in your hands . . . We await the decision of your truthful heart!”
But she was unable to finish; the prince was horrified and almost
trembled with fear:

“Après, après, n’est-ce pas? Chère amie! ” 103; he repeated, holding his
hands up to her.
I can’t express how unpleasantly her outburst also affected me. I said
nothing in reply and contented myself only with a cold and grave bow; then
I sat down at the table and even deliberately began talking about other
things, about some foolishness, started laughing and cracking jokes . . . The
old man was obviously grateful to me and became rapturously merry. But
his merriment, though rapturous, was somehow fragile and might be
supplanted at any moment by complete dispiritedness; that was clear from
the first glance.
“Cher enfant, I hear you were ill . . . Ah, pardon! I hear you’ve been
occupied all the while with spiritism?”41
“Never dreamed of it,” I smiled.
“No? Then who was talking about spir-it-ism?”
“That clerk here, Pyotr Ippolitovich, spoke to you about it earlier,” Anna
Andreevna explained. “He’s a very merry man and knows lots of anecdotes;
would you like me to invite him here?”
“Oui, oui, il est charmant104 . . . he knows anecdotes, but we’d better
invite him later. We’ll invite him, and he’ll tell us everything, mais après.
Imagine, earlier they were setting the table, and he says, ‘Don’t worry, it
won’t fly away, we’re not spiritists.’ Can spiritists make tables fly?”
“I really don’t know; they say they get all four legs off the ground.”
“Mais c’est terrible ce que tu dis,”105 he looked at me in fright.
“Oh, don’t worry, it’s nonsense.”
“I say so myself. Nastasya Stepanovna Salomeeva . . . you do know her .
. . ah, no, you don’t know her . . . imagine, she also believes in spiritism,
and imagine, chère enfant,” he turned to Anna Andreevna, “I tell her there

are tables in the ministry as well, with eight pairs of clerkly hands lying on
them, all writing documents—why don’t the tables dance there? Imagine if
they suddenly started dancing! A revolt of the tables in the Ministry of
Finance or National Education—just what we need!”
“What nice things you say, Prince, as always,” I exclaimed, trying to
laugh sincerely.
“N’est-ce pas? Je ne parle pas trop, mais je dis bien.” 106
“I’ll bring Pyotr Ippolitovich,” Anna Andreevna got up. Her face shone
with pleasure; she was glad to see how affectionate I was with the old man.
But as soon as she went out, the old man’s face changed instantly. He
glanced back hastily at the door, looked around, and, leaning towards me
from the sofa, whispered in a frightened voice:
“Cher ami! Oh, if only I could see the two of them here together! Oh,
cher enfant! ”
“Calm yourself, Prince . . .”
“Yes, yes, but . . . we’ll reconcile them, n’est-ce pas? It’s an empty little
quarrel of two most worthy women, n’est-ce pas? I put my hopes in you
alone . . . We’ll straighten it all out here; and what a strange apartment you
have here,” he looked around almost fearfully, “and, you know, this
landlord . . . he’s got such a face . . . Tell me, he’s not dangerous?”
“The landlord? Oh, no! how could he be dangerous?”
“C’est ça.107 So much the better. Il semble qu’il est bête, ce
gentilhomme.108 Cher enfant, for Christ’s sake, don’t tell Anna Andreevna
that I’m afraid of everything here; I praised everything here from the first, I
praised the landlord, too. Listen, you know the story of von Sohn42—
remember?”
“What about it?”

“Rien, rien du tout . . . Mais je suis libre ici, n’est-ce pas? 109 What do
you think, can anything happen to me here . . . of the same sort?”
“But I assure you, dearest Prince . . . for pity’s sake!”
“Mon ami! Mon enfant! ” he exclaimed suddenly, clasping his hands
before him and no longer hiding his fear. “If you do indeed have something
. . . documents . . . in short, if you have anything to tell me, then don’t tell
me; for God’s sake, don’t tell me anything; better not tell me at all . . . for as
long as you can, don’t tell me . . .”
He was about to rush and embrace me; tears poured down his face; I
can’t express how my heart was wrung: the poor old man was like a
pathetic, weak, frightened child, stolen from his own nest by gypsies and
taken to strangers. But we were kept from embracing: the door opened, and
in came Anna Andreevna, not with the landlord, but with her brother, the
kammerjunker. This novelty astounded me; I got up and made for the door.
“Arkady Makarovich, allow me to introduce you,” Anna Andreevna said
loudly, so that I involuntarily had to stop.
“I’m only too well acquainted with your dear brother already,” I said
distinctly, especially emphasizing the words “only too well.”
“Ah, there’s a terrible mistake here! And I do apo-lo-gize, my dear And .
. . Andrei Makarovich,” the young man began to maunder, approaching me
with an extraordinarily casual air and taking hold of my hand, which I was
unable to withdraw. “It’s all my Stepan’s fault. He announced you so
stupidly then that I took you for someone else—this was in Moscow,” he
clarified for his sister, “then I tried my best to find you and explain, but I
fell ill, ask her . . . Cher prince, nous devons être amis même par droit de
naissance . . .”110
And the brazen young man even dared to put one arm around my
shoulder, which was the height of familiarity. I drew back, but, in my
embarrassment, preferred to leave quickly without saying a word. Going
into my room, I sat down on the bed, thoughtful and agitated. The intrigue

was suffocating me, yet I couldn’t just dumbfound Anna Andreevna and cut
her down. I suddenly felt that she, too, was dear to me, and that her position
was terrible.

III
AS I EXPECTED, she came into my room herself, having left the prince
with her brother, who began telling him some society gossip, the most
recent and fresh-baked, and instantly cheered up the impressionable old
man. I got up from the bed silently and with a questioning look.
“I’ve told you everything, Arkady Makarovich,” she began directly. “Our
fate is in your hands.”
“But I also warned you that I can’t . . . The most sacred duties prevent me
from fulfilling your expectations . . .”
“Oh? So that’s your answer? Well, let me perish, but what of the old
man? What are your expectations: will he lose his mind by evening?”
“No, he’ll lose his mind if I show him his daughter’s letter, in which she
consults a lawyer about declaring her father insane!” I exclaimed
vehemently. “That’s what he won’t be able to bear. You should know that he
doesn’t believe this letter, he’s already told me!”
I lied about his telling me; but it was opportune.
“Already told you? Just as I thought! In that case, I’m lost. He was
weeping just now and asking to be taken home.”
“Tell me, what does your plan in fact consist in?” I asked insistently.
She blushed, from wounded arrogance, so to speak, though she controlled
herself:
“With this letter of his daughter’s in our hands, we are justified in the
eyes of the world. I’ll send word at once to Prince V——sky and Boris

Mikhailovich Pelishchev, his childhood friends; they’re both respectable
men with influence in the world, and I know that two years ago they were
already indignant at certain actions of his merciless and greedy daughter.
They will, of course, reconcile him with his daughter, at my request, and I
myself will insist on it; but, on the other hand, the state of affairs will
change completely. Besides, then my relations, the Fanariotovs, as I expect,
will venture to support my rights. But for me his happiness comes before
everything; let him understand, finally, and appreciate who is really devoted
to him! Unquestionably, I’m counting most of all on your influence, Arkady
Makarovich; you love him so much . . . And who else loves him except you
and I? You’re all he talked about these last few days; he pined for you,
you’re ‘his young friend’ . . . It goes without saying that, for the rest of my
life, my gratitude will know no bounds . . .”
This meant she was now offering me a reward—money, maybe.
I interrupted her sharply.
“No matter what you say, I can’t,” I said with an air of unshakable
resolution. “I can only repay you with the same frankness and explain to
you my latest intentions: I will, in the nearest future, hand this fatal letter
over to Katerina Nikolaevna, but with the understanding that no scandal
will be made of all that has just happened, and that she gives her word
beforehand that she will not interfere with your happiness. That is all I can
do.”
“This is impossible!” she said, blushing all over. The mere thought that
Katerina Nikolaevna would spare her, made her indignant.
“I will not alter my decision, Anna Andreevna.”
“Maybe you will.”
“Turn to Lambert!”
“Arkady Makarovich, you don’t know what misfortunes may come of
your stubbornness,” she said sternly and bitterly.

“Misfortunes will come—that’s certain . . . my head is spinning. Enough
talk; my mind is made up and that’s the end of it. Only for God’s sake, I beg
you, don’t bring your brother to me.”
“But he precisely wishes to smooth over . . .”
“There’s nothing to smooth over! I don’t need it, I don’t want it, I don’t
want it!” I exclaimed, clutching my head. (Oh, maybe I treated her too
haughtily then!) “Tell me, however, where will the prince spend the night
tonight? Surely not here?”
“He’ll spend the night here, in your place and with you.”
“By evening I’ll have moved to another apartment!”
And after these merciless words, I seized my hat and began putting on
my coat. Anna Andreevna watched me silently and sternly. I felt sorry—oh,
I felt sorry for this proud girl! But I ran out of the apartment, not leaving her
a word of hope.

IV
I’LL TRY TO make it short. My decision was taken irrevocably, and I went
straight to Tatyana Pavlovna. Alas! a great misfortune could have been
prevented if I had found her at home then; but, as if by design, I was
especially pursued by bad luck that day. Of course, I went by mama’s as
well, first of all to see how poor mama was, and, second, counting almost
certainly on meeting Tatyana Pavlovna there. But she wasn’t there either;
she had just gone somewhere, mama was sick in bed, and Liza alone
remained with her. Liza asked me not to come in and waken mama: “She
didn’t sleep all night and was suffering; thank God, now at least she’s fallen
asleep.” I embraced Liza and told her in only a word or two that I had taken
an enormous and fateful decision, and that I would presently carry it out.
She listened without any special surprise, as if to the most usual words. Oh,
they were all accustomed then to my ceaseless “final decisions” and to their
fainthearted cancellation afterwards. But now—now it was a different

matter! I did stop by at the tavern on the canal, though, and sat there to
while away the time, and then certainly catch Tatyana Pavlovna. However, I
should explain why I suddenly needed this woman so much. The thing was
that I wanted to send her at once to Katerina Nikolaevna, to invite her to her
apartment and in Tatyana Pavlovna’s presence return the document to her,
having explained everything once and for all . . . In short, I wanted what
was only fitting: I wanted to justify myself once and for all. On finishing
with that point, I had absolutely and now imperatively resolved to put in a
few words right then in favor of Anna Andreevna, and, if possible, to take
Katerina Nikolaevna and Tatyana Pavlovna (as a witness), bring them to my
place, that is, to the prince, and there reconcile the hostile women, resurrect
the prince, and . . . and . . . in short, make everyone happy this very day, at
least here in this little bunch, so that only Versilov and mama would be left.
I could have no doubt of success. Katerina Nikolaevna, grateful for the
return of the letter, for which I would not ask her anything, could not refuse
me such a request. Alas, I still imagined that I was in possession of the
document! Oh, what a stupid and undignified position I was in, without
knowing it myself !
It was already quite dark and around four o’clock when I again dropped
in at Tatyana Pavlovna’s. Marya answered rudely that she “hasn’t come
back.” I well recall Marya’s strange, furtive glance now; but then, naturally,
nothing could have entered my head. On the contrary, another thought
suddenly pricked me: as I was going down Tatyana Pavlovna’s back stairs,
vexed and somewhat dejected, I remembered the poor prince, who had
reached out his hands to me today—and I suddenly reproached myself
painfully for having abandoned him, maybe even out of personal vexation. I
worriedly began imagining that something even very bad might have
happened to them in my absence, and I hastily headed for home. At home,
however, only the following circumstances occurred.
Anna Andreevna, having left me in wrath earlier, had not yet lost heart. It
must be said that she had already sent to Lambert in the morning, then sent
to him once again, and since Lambert had still not turned up at home, she
finally sent her brother to look for him. The poor girl, seeing my resistance,
placed her last hopes in Lambert and his influence on me. She was waiting

impatiently for Lambert, and only marveled that he, who wouldn’t leave her
side and had fawned on her till today, had suddenly abandoned her entirely
and vanished. Alas! it couldn’t even enter her head that Lambert, now in
possession of the document, had taken quite different decisions, and
therefore, of course, was avoiding her and even purposely hiding from her.
Thus, worried and with increasing anxiety in her soul, Anna Andreevna
was almost unable to divert the old man; and meanwhile his worry had
grown to threatening proportions. He asked strange and fearful questions,
started casting suspicious glances even at her, and several times began to
weep. Young Versilov hadn’t stayed long then. After he left, Anna
Andreevna finally brought Pyotr Ippolitovich, in whom she placed such
hopes, but the man was not found pleasing at all, and even provoked
disgust. In general, the prince for some reason looked at Pyotr Ippolitovich
with ever-growing mistrust and suspicion. And the landlord, as if on
purpose, again started his talk about spiritism and some tricks he himself
had supposedly seen performed, namely, how some itinerant charlatan had
supposedly cut people’s heads off before the whole public, so that the blood
flowed and everyone could see it, and then put them back onto the necks,
and they supposedly grew on again, also before the whole public, and all
this had supposedly taken place in the year fifty-nine. The prince was so
frightened, and at the same time became so indignant for some reason, that
Anna Andreevna was forced to remove the narrator immediately.
Fortunately, dinner arrived, ordered specially the day before somewhere in
the neighborhood (through Lambert and Alphonsinka) from a remarkable
French chef, who was without a post and was seeking to place himself in an
aristocratic house or club. Dinner with champagne diverted the old man
extremely; he ate a great deal and was very jocular. After dinner, of course,
he felt heavy and wanted to sleep, and as he always slept after dinner, Anna
Andreevna prepared a bed for him. As he was falling asleep, he kept kissing
her hands, said that she was his paradise, his hope, his houri, his “golden
flower”—in short, he went off into the most Oriental expressions. At last he
fell asleep, and it was just then that I returned.
Anna Andreevna hurriedly came into my room, pressed her hands
together before me, and said, “no longer for her own sake, but for the

prince’s,” that she “begs me not to leave, and to go to him when he wakes
up. Without you, he’ll perish, he’ll have a nervous breakdown; I’m afraid he
won’t last till nighttime . . .” She added that she herself absolutely had to be
absent, “maybe even for two hours,” which meant that she was “leaving the
prince to me alone.” I warmly gave her my word that I’d stay till evening,
and that when he woke up, I’d do all I could to divert him.
“And I will do my duty!” she concluded energetically.
She left. I’ll add, running ahead, that she herself went looking for
Lambert; this was her last hope. On top of that, she visited her brother and
her Fanariotov family; it’s clear what state of mind she must have come
back in.
The prince woke up about an hour after she left. I heard him groan
through the wall and ran to him at once. I found him sitting on his bed in a
dressing gown, but so frightened by the solitude, by the light of the single
lamp, and by the strange room, that when I came in he gave a start, jumped
up, and cried out. I rushed to him, and when he made out that it was I, he
began to embrace me with tears of joy.
“And they told me you had moved somewhere, to another apartment, that
you got frightened and ran away.”
“Who could have told you that?”
“Who could? You see, I may have thought it up myself, or maybe
someone told me. Imagine, I just had a dream: in comes an old man with a
beard and with an icon, an icon that’s split in two, and he suddenly says,
‘That’s how your life will be split!’”
“Ah, my God, you must have heard from someone that Versilov broke an
icon yesterday?”
“N’est-ce pas? I heard, I heard! I heard it this morning from Nastasya
Egorovna. She moved my trunk and my little dog over here.”

“Well, and so you dreamed of it.”
“Well, it makes no difference. And imagine, this old man kept shaking
his finger at me. Where is Anna Andreevna?”
“She’ll be back presently.”
“From where? Has she also gone?” he exclaimed with pain.
“No, no, she’ll be back presently, and she asked me to sit with you.”
“Oui, to come here. And so our Andrei Petrovich has gone off his head
—‘so inadvertently and so swiftly!’43 I always predicted to him that he’d
end up that way. My friend, wait . . .”
He suddenly seized me by the frock coat with his hand and pulled me
towards him.
“Today,” he began to whisper, “the landlord suddenly brought me
photographs, vile photographs of women, all naked women in various
Oriental guises, and began showing them to me through a glass . . . You see,
I praised them reluctantly, but that’s just how they brought vile women to
that unfortunate man, to make it easier to get him drunk . . .”
“You keep on about von Sohn, but enough, Prince! The landlord is a fool
and nothing more!”
“A fool and nothing more! C’est mon opinion! 111 My friend, save me
from this place if you can!” he suddenly pressed his hands together before
me.
“Prince, I’ll do everything I can! I’m all yours . . . Dear Prince, wait, and
maybe I’ll settle everything!”
“N’est-cepas? We’ll up and run away, and we’ll leave the trunk for
appearances, so that he’ll think we’re coming back.”

“Run away where? And Anna Andreevna?”
“No, no, together with Anna Andreevna . . . Oh, mon cher, I’ve got some
sort of jumble in my head . . . Wait—there, in my bag, to the right, is
Katya’s portrait; I put it there on the sly, so that Anna Andreevna and
especially this Nastasya Egorovna wouldn’t notice. Take it out, for God’s
sake, quickly, carefully, watch out that they don’t find us . . . Can’t we put
the hook on the door?”
Indeed, I found in the bag a photographic portrait of Katerina Nikolaevna
in an oval frame. He took it in his hands, brought it to the light, and tears
suddenly poured down his gaunt yellow cheeks.
“C’est un ange, c’est un ange du ciel!”112 he exclaimed. “All my life I’ve
been guilty before her . . . and now, too! Chère enfant, I don’t believe
anything, anything! My friend, tell me: well, is it possible to imagine that
they want to put me in a madhouse? Je dis des choses charmantes et tout le
monde rit 113 . . . and suddenly this man is taken to the madhouse?”
“That was never so!” I cried. “That is a mistake! I know her feelings!”
“And you also know her feelings? Why, that’s wonderful! My friend,
you’ve resurrected me. What was all that they were telling me about you?
My friend, invite Katya here, and let the two of them kiss each other before
me, and I’ll take them home, and we’ll chase the landlord away!”
He stood up, pressed his hands together before me, and suddenly knelt
before me.
“Cher,” he whispered, now in some sort of insane fear, all shaking like a
leaf, “my friend, tell me the whole truth: where are they going to put me
now?”
“God!” I cried, raising him up and sitting him on the bed, “you finally
don’t believe me either; you think I’m also in the conspiracy? But I won’t
let anyone here even lay a finger on you!”

“C’est ça, don’t let them,” he babbled, seizing me firmly by the elbows
with both hands, and continuing to tremble. “Don’t let anybody! And don’t
tell me any lies . . . because can it be that they’ll take me away from here?
Listen, this landlord, Ippolit, or whoever he is, he’s not . . . a doctor?”
“What sort of doctor?”
“This . . . this isn’t a madhouse, I mean here, in this room?”
But at that moment the door suddenly opened and Anna Andreevna came
in. She must have been eavesdropping by the door and, unable to help
herself, opened it too abruptly—and the prince, who jumped at every creak,
cried out and threw himself facedown on the pillow. He finally had some
sort of fit, which resolved itself in sobbing.
“Here are the fruits of your work,” I said to her, pointing to the old man.
“No, these are the fruits of your work!” she raised her voice sharply. “I
turn to you for the last time, Arkady Makarovich: do you want to reveal the
infernal intrigue against the defenseless old man and sacrifice your ‘insane
and childish amorous dreams’ in order to save your own sister?”
“I’ll save you all, but only in the way I told you before! I’m running off
again; maybe in an hour Katerina Nikolaevna herself will be here! I’ll
reconcile everybody, and everybody will be happy!” I exclaimed almost
with inspiration.
“Bring her, bring her here,” the prince roused himself. “Take me to her! I
want Katya, I want to see Katya and bless her!” he exclaimed, raising his
arms and trying to get out of bed.
“You see,” I pointed at him to Anna Andreevna, “you hear what he says:
now in any case no ‘document’ will help you.”
“I see, but it could still help to justify my action in the opinion of the
world, while now—I’m disgraced! Enough; my conscience is clear. I’ve
been abandoned by everyone, even my own brother, who is afraid of failure

. . . But I will do my duty and stay by this unfortunate man as his nurse, his
attendant!”
But there was no time to be lost, and I ran out of the room.
“I’ll come back in an hour, and I won’t come back alone!” I called out
from the threshold.

Chapter Twelve
I
I FINALLY CAUGHT Tatyana Pavlovna! I explained everything to her at
once—everything about the document, and everything, to the last shred,
about what was happening in our apartment. Though she understood these
events only too well herself and could have grasped the matter after two
words, the explanation nevertheless took us, I think, about ten minutes. I
alone spoke, I spoke the whole truth, and I wasn’t ashamed. She sat silent
and motionless on her chair, drawn up straight as a poker, her lips pressed
together, not taking her eyes off me, and listening with all her might. But
when I finished, she suddenly jumped up from her chair, and so
precipitously that I jumped up, too.
“Ah, you little cur! So you’ve really got that letter sewn in, and it was
that fool Marya Ivanovna who did the sewing! Ah, you outrageous
scoundrels! So you came here to conquer hearts, to win over high society, to
take revenge on Devil Ivanovich because you’re an illegitimate son, is that
what you wanted?”
“Tatyana Pavlovna,” I cried, “don’t you dare abuse me! It may be you,
with your abuse, who from the very beginning were the cause of my
bitterness here. Yes, I’m an illegitimate son, and maybe I did indeed want to
take revenge for being an illegitimate son, and maybe indeed on some Devil
Ivanovich, because the devil himself won’t find who’s to blame here; but
remember that I rejected an alliance with the scoundrels and overcame my
passions! I will silently place the document before her and leave without
even waiting for a word from her; you yourself will be the witness!”
“Give me the letter, give it to me right now, put it here on the table! Or
maybe you’re lying?”

“It’s sewn into my pocket; Marya Ivanovna herself did the sewing. And
here, when I had a new frock coat made, I took it from the old one and
sewed it into this new frock coat myself; it’s here, feel it, I’m not lying,
ma’am!”
“Give it to me, take it out!” Tatyana Pavlovna stormed.
“Not for anything, ma’am, I repeat it to you. I’ll place it before her in
your presence and leave, without waiting for a single word; but it’s
necessary that she know and see with her own eyes that it is I, I myself,
who am giving it to her, voluntarily, without compulsion and without
reward.”
“Showing off again? Are you in love, you little cur?”
“Say as many nasty things as you like. Go on, I deserve it, but I’m not
offended. Oh, let me look like a paltry little brat to her, who spied on her
and plotted a conspiracy, but let her recognize that I conquered myself and
placed her happiness higher than anything in the world! Never mind,
Tatyana Pavlovna, never mind! I cry out to myself: courage and hope! Let
this be my first step on life’s path, but then it has ended well, ended nobly!
And what if I do love her,” I went on inspiredly and flashing my eyes, “I’m
not ashamed of it: mama is a heavenly angel, but she is an earthly queen!
Versilov will go back to mama, and I’m not going to be ashamed before her;
I did hear what she and Versilov said then, I was standing behind the curtain
. . . Oh, all three of us are ‘people of the same madness’! Do you know
whose phrase that is—‘people of the same madness’? It’s his phrase, Andrei
Petrovich’s! Do you know, maybe there are more than three of us here who
are of the same madness? I’ll bet you’re a fourth one of the same madness!
Want me to say it? I’ll bet you yourself have been in love with Andrei
Petrovich all your life and maybe still are . . .”
I repeat, I was inspired and in some sort of happiness, but I had no time
to finish. She suddenly seized me by the hair with some unnatural swiftness
and tugged me downwards twice with all her might . . . then suddenly left

me, went into the corner, stood facing the corner, and covered her face with
a handkerchief.
“Little cur! Don’t you ever dare say that to me again!” she said, weeping.
This was all so unexpected that I was naturally dumbfounded. I stood and
gazed at her, not yet knowing what I should do.
“Pah, you fool! Come here, kiss me, foolish woman that I am!” she said
suddenly, weeping and laughing. “And don’t you dare, don’t you ever dare
repeat that to me . . . But I love you and have loved you all your life . . . fool
that you are.”
I kissed her. I will add in parenthesis: from then on Tatyana Pavlovna and
I became friends.
“Ah, yes! But what’s the matter with me!” she suddenly exclaimed,
slapping herself on the forehead. “What were you saying? The old prince is
there in your apartment? Is it true?”
“I assure you.”
“Ah, my God! Oh, I’m sick!” she whirled and rushed about the room.
“And they order him around! Eh, there’s no lightning to strike the fools!
Ever since morning? That’s Anna Andreevna! That’s the nun! And the other
one, Militrisa,44 doesn’t know anything!”
“What Militrisa?”
“The earthly queen, the ideal! Eh, but what are we to do now?”
“Tatyana Pavlovna!” I cried, coming to my senses. “We’ve been saying
foolish things, and we’ve forgotten the main thing: I ran here precisely to
fetch Katerina Nikolaevna, and they’re all waiting for me to come back.”
And I explained that I would hand the document over only if she gave
her word to make peace with Anna Andreevna immediately and even agree

to her marriage . . .
“And that’s splendid,” Tatyana Pavlovna interrupted, “and I, too, have
repeated it to her a hundred times. He’ll die before the wedding—anyway
he won’t marry her, and if it’s about him leaving her money in his will—
Anna, I mean—it’s been written in and left to her even without that . . .”
“Can it be that Katerina Nikolaevna is only sorry about the money?”
“No, she was afraid all along that she had the document—Anna, I mean
—and I was, too. So we kept watch on her. The daughter didn’t want to
shock the old man, but, true, the little German, Bjoring, was also sorry
about the money.”
“And she can marry Bjoring after that?”
“What can you do with a foolish woman? As they say, once a fool,
always a fool. You see, he’s going to give her some sort of calm. ‘I must
marry somebody,’ she says, ‘so I suppose he’d be the most suitable one.’
We’ll see just how suitable it will be. She’ll slap her sides afterwards, but it
will be too late.”
“Then why do you allow it? Don’t you love her; didn’t you tell her to her
face that you’re in love with her?”
“And I am in love with her, I love her more than all of you taken
together, but still she’s a senseless fool!”
“Then run and fetch her now, and we’ll resolve everything and take her in
person to her father.”
“But it’s impossible, impossible, you little fool! That’s the point! Ah,
what to do! Ah, I’m sick!” She rushed about again, though she did snatch
up her shawl. “E-eh, if only you had come four hours earlier, it’s past seven
now, and she went to dine with the Pelishchevs some time ago, and then to
go with them to the opera.”

“Lord, can’t we run over to the opera . . . no, we can’t! What’s going to
happpen to the old man? He may die during the night!”
“Listen, don’t go there, go to your mama, sleep there, and tomorrow early
. . .”
“No, I won’t leave the old man for anything, whatever may come of it.”
“Don’t leave him; that’s good of you. And, you know . . . I’ll run to her
place anyhow and leave her a note . . . you know, I’ll write it in our own
words (she’ll understand!), that the document is here, and that tomorrow at
exactly ten o’clock in the morning she must be at my place—on the dot!
Don’t worry, she’ll come, she’ll listen to me—then we’ll settle everything
at once. And you go there and fuss over the old man as much as you can,
put him to bed, chances are he’ll survive till morning! Don’t frighten Anna
either; I love her, too. You’re unfair to her, because you can’t understand
these things: she’s offended, she’s been offended since childhood. Oh, you
all pile up on me! And don’t forget, tell her from me that I’ve taken this
matter up myself, with all my heart, and that she should be at peace, and
there will be no damage to her pride . . . Over the past few days she and I
have squabbled, quarreled—fallen out completely! Well, off you run . . .
wait, show me the pocket again . . . is it true, is it true? Oh, is it true? Give
me the letter for the night, what is it to you? Leave it, I won’t eat it. You
may let it slip out of your hands during the night . . . do change your mind?”
“Not for anything!” I cried. “There, feel it, look, but I won’t leave it with
you for anything.”
“I see there’s a piece of paper,” she felt it with her fingers. “E-eh, all
right, go, and I may even swing by the theater for her, that was a good idea!
But run, run!”
“Wait, Tatyana Pavlovna, how’s mama?”
“Alive.”
“And Andrei Petrovich?”

She waved her hand.
“He’ll come round!”
I ran off encouraged, reassured, though it hadn’t turned out the way I had
reckoned. But, alas, fate had determined differently, and something else
awaited me—truly, there is a fatum in the world!

II
WHILE STILL ON the stairs, I heard noise in our apartment, and the door
turned out to be open. In the corridor stood an unknown lackey in livery.
Pyotr Ippolitovich and his wife, both frightened by something, were also in
the corridor and waiting for something. The door to the prince’s room was
open and a voice was thundering there, which I recognized at once—the
voice of Bjoring. I hadn’t managed to step two steps when I suddenly saw
the prince, tearful and trembling, being taken out to the corridor by Bjoring
and his companion, Baron R., the same one who had come to Versilov for a
talk. The prince was sobbing loudly, embracing and kissing Bjoring.
Bjoring’s shouting was addressed to Anna Andreevna, who also came out to
the corridor after the prince; he threatened her and, I believe, stamped his
feet—in short, the coarse German soldier told in him, despite all his “high
society.” Later it was discovered that for some reason it had come into his
head then that Anna Andreevna was even guilty of something criminal and
now unquestionably had to answer for her action even before the court. In
his ignorance of the matter, he exaggerated it, as happens to many, and
therefore began to consider it his right to be unceremonious in the highest
degree. Above all, he had had no time to go into it. He had been informed
of it all anonymously, as it turned out later (and of which I will make
mention later), and had flown at them in that state of the enraged
gentleman, in which even the most intelligent people of his nation are
sometimes ready to start brawling like cobblers. Anna Andreevna had met
this whole swoop with the highest degree of dignity, but I missed that. I
only saw that, having taken the old man out to the corridor, Bjoring
suddenly left him in the hands of Baron R. and, turning swiftly to Anna

Andreevna, shouted at her, probably in response to some remark she had
made:
“You are an intriguer! You want his money! From this moment on you
are disgraced in society, and you will answer before the court! . . .”
“It’s you who are exploiting an unfortunate invalid and driving him to
madness . . . and you shout at me because I’m a woman and have no one to
defend me . . .”
“Ah, yes! you are his fiancée, his fiancée!” Bjoring guffawed spitefully
and furiously.
“Baron, Baron . . . Chère enfant, je vous aime,”114 the prince wept out,
reaching his arms towards Anna Andreevna.
“Go, Prince, go, there has been a conspiracy against you and maybe even
a threat to your life!” cried Bjoring.
“Oui, oui, je comprends, j’ai compris au commencement . . .” 115
“Prince,” Anna Andreevna raised her voice, “you insult me and allow me
to be insulted!”
“Away with you!” Bjoring suddenly shouted at her.
That I could not endure.
“Blackguard!” I yelled at him. “Anna Andreevna, I’ll be your defender!”
Here I will not and cannot describe anything in detail. A terrible and
ignoble scene took place, and it was as if I suddenly lost my reason. It
seems I leaped over and struck him, or at least shoved him hard. He also
struck me with all his might on the head, so that I fell to the floor. Coming
to my senses, I started after them down the stairs; I remember that my nose
was bleeding. A carriage was waiting for them at the entrance, and while
the prince was being put into it, I ran up to the carriage and, despite the

lackey, who was pushing me away, again threw myself on Bjoring. I don’t
remember how the police turned up. Bjoring seized me by the scruff of the
neck and sternly told the policeman to take me to the precinct. I shouted
that he had to go with me, so that he could file a statement with me, and that
they couldn’t take me like that, almost from my own apartment. But since it
had happened in the street and not in my apartment, and since I shouted,
swore, and fought like a drunk man, and since Bjoring was in his uniform,
the policeman arrested me. Here I became totally furious and, resisting with
all my might, it seems I struck the policeman as well. Then, I remember,
two of them suddenly appeared, and I was taken away. I barely remember
being brought to some smoke-filled room, with a lot of different people
sitting and standing around, waiting and writing. I went on shouting here, I
demanded to file a statement. But the case no longer consisted only in a
statement, but was complicated by violence and resistance to the authority
of the police. And my appearance was all too unseemly. Someone suddenly
shouted menacingly at me. The policeman had meanwhile accused me of
fighting, had told about the colonel . . .
“Your name?” someone cried to me.
“Dolgoruky,” I roared.
“Prince Dolgoruky?”
Beside myself, I responded with quite a nasty curse word, and then . . .
and then I remember they dragged me to some dark little room “for
sobering up.” Oh, I’m not protesting. The public all read in the newspapers
not long ago the complaint of some gentleman who sat all night under
arrest, bound, and also in a sobering-up room, but he, it seems, wasn’t even
guilty; while I was guilty. I collapsed on a bunk in the company of some
two unconsciously sleeping people. My head ached, there was a throbbing
in my temples, a throbbing in my heart. It must be that I became oblivious
and, it seems, I raved. I remember only that I woke up in the middle of the
deep night and sat up on the bunk. All at once I remembered everything and
grasped everything, and, putting my elbows on my knees, propping my
head in my hands, I sank into deep thought.

Oh! I’m not going to describe my feelings, and I also have no time, but I
will note just one thing: maybe never have I experienced more delightful
moments in my soul than in those minutes of reflection in the depths of the
night, on the bunk, under arrest. This may seem strange to the reader, a sort
of ink-slinging, a wish to shine with originality—and yet it was all just as I
say. It was one of those minutes that, perhaps, occur with everyone, but that
come only once in a lifetime. In such moments you decide your fate,
determine your worldview, and say to yourself once and for all your life:
“Here is where the truth lies, and here is where I should go to reach it.” Yes,
those moments were the light of my soul. Insulted by the arrogant Bjoring,
and hoping to be insulted by that high-society woman tomorrow, I knew
only too well that I could take terrible revenge on them, but I decided that I
would not take revenge. I decided, despite all temptation, that I would not
reveal the document, would not make it known to the whole world (as had
already spun round in my mind); I repeated to myself that tomorrow I
would place the letter before her and, if necessary, even endure a mocking
smile from her instead of gratitude, but still I would not say a word and
would leave her forever . . . However, there’s no point in expanding on it.
Of all that would happen to me here tomorrow, of how I’d be brought
before the authorities and what would be done to me, I almost forgot to
think. I crossed myself lovingly, lay down on the bunk, and fell into a
serene, childlike sleep.
I awoke late, when it was already light. I was now the only one in the
room. I sat up and began silently waiting, a long time, about an hour; it
must have been about nine o’clock when I was suddenly summoned. I could
go into greater detail, but it’s not worth it, for it’s all extraneous now; all I
want to do is finish telling the main thing. I’ll only point out that, to my
greatest amazement, I was treated with unexpected politeness: they asked
me something, I answered something, and I was at once let go. I went out
silently, and it was with pleasure that I read in their looks even a certain
surprise at a man who, even in such a position, was capable of not losing his
dignity. If I hadn’t noticed it, I wouldn’t have written it down. At the exit,
Tatyana Pavlovna was waiting for me. I’ll explain in two words why I got
off so easily then.

Early in the morning, maybe at eight o’clock, Tatyana Pavlovna came
flying to my apartment, that is, to Pyotr Ippolitovich’s, still hoping to find
the prince there, and suddenly learned about all of yesterday’s horrors, and
above all that I had been arrested. She instantly rushed to Katerina
Nikolaevna (who, the evening before, on returning from the theater, had
met with her father, who had been brought to her), woke her up, frightened
her, and demanded that I be released immediately. With a note from her, she
flew at once to Bjoring and immediately obtained another note from him, to
“the proper person,” with an urgent request from Bjoring himself that I be
released, “having been arrested through a misunderstanding.” With this note
she arrived at the precinct, and his request was honored.

III
NOW I’LL GO on with the main thing.
Tatyana Pavlovna, having picked me up, put me in a cab, brought me to
her place, immediately ordered the samovar, and washed me and scrubbed
me in the kitchen herself. Also in the kitchen, she loudly told me that at
half-past eleven Katerina Nikolaevna herself would come—as the two had
already arranged earlier—in order to meet me. And this Marya also heard.
After a few minutes she brought the samovar, but after another two minutes,
when Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly summoned her, she did not respond. It
turned out that she had gone somewhere. I ask the reader to note that very
well; it was then, I suppose, about a quarter to ten. Though Tatyana
Pavlovna was angry at her disappearing without asking, she merely thought
she had gone to the shop, and at once forgot about it for a while. And we
couldn’t be bothered with that; we talked nonstop, because we had things to
discuss, so that I, for instance, paid almost no attention to Marya’s
disappearance; I ask the reader to remember that as well.
Needless to say, I was as if in a daze; I was explaining my feelings, and
above all—we were waiting for Katerina Nikolaevna, and the thought that
in an hour I would finally meet with her, and at such a decisive moment of
my life, made me tremble and quake. Finally, when I had drunk two cups,

Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly got up, took a pair of scissors from the table,
and said:
“Give me your pocket, we must take out the letter—we can’t cut it with
her here!”
“Right!” I exclaimed, and unbuttoned my frock coat.
“What’s all this tangle here? Who did the sewing?”
“I did, I did, Tatyana Pavlovna.”
“That’s obvious. Well, here it is . . .”
The letter was taken out; it was the same old envelope, but with a blank
piece of paper stuck into it.
“What’s this? . . .” Tatyana Pavlovna exclaimed, turning it over. “What’s
got into you?”
But I stood there speechless, pale . . . and suddenly sank strengthlessly
onto the chair; truly, I almost fainted away.
“What on earth is this?” Tatyana Pavlovna yelled. “Where is your note?”
“Lambert!” I jumped up suddenly, realizing and slapping myself on the
forehead.
Hurrying and breathless, I explained everything to her—the night at
Lambert’s, and our conspiracy at the time; however, I had already confessed
this conspiracy to her the day before.
“They stole it! They stole it!” I cried, stamping the floor and seizing
myself by the hair.
“Trouble!” Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly decided, grasping what it meant.
“What time is it?”

It was about eleven.
“Eh, Marya’s not here! . . . Marya, Marya!”
“What is it, ma’am?” Marya suddenly responded from the kitchen.
“You’re here? So what are we to do now? I’ll fly to her . . . Ah, you
dodderer, you dodderer!”
“And I’ll go to Lambert!” I yelled. “And I’ll strangle him, if need be!”
“Ma’am!” Marya suddenly squeaked from the kitchen. “There’s some
woman here asking for you very much . . .”
But before she finished speaking, the “some woman” herself burst
precipitously from the kitchen with cries and screams. It was Alphonsinka. I
won’t describe the scene in full detail; the scene was a trick and a fake, but
it should be noted that Alphonsinka played it splendidly. With tears of
repentance and with violent gestures, she rattled out (in French, naturally)
that she herself had cut out the letter then, that it was now with Lambert,
and that Lambert, with “that brigand,” cet homme noir,116 wanted to lure
madame la générale117 and shoot her, right now, in an hour . . . that she had
learned it all from them and had suddenly become terribly frightened,
because she saw they had a pistol, le pistolet, and had now rushed to us, so
that we could go, save, prevent . . . Cet homme noir . . .
In short, it was all extremely plausible; the very stupidity of some of
Alphonsinka’s explanations even increased the plausibility.
“What homme noir?” cried Tatyana Pavlovna.
“ Tiens, j’ai oublié son nom . . . Un homme a freux . . . Tiens, Versilo
f.”118
“Versilov! It can’t be!” I yelled.

“Oh, yes, it can!” shrieked Tatyana Pavlovna. “But speak, dearie, without
jumping, without waving your arms. What is it they want? Talk sense,
dearie. I refuse to believe they want to shoot her!”
The “dearie” talked the following sense (NB: it was all a lie, I warn you
again): Versilo f would sit behind the door, and Lambert, as soon as she
came in, would show her cette lettre, here Versilo f would jump out, and
they . . . Oh, ils feront leur vengeance!119; That she, Alphonsinka, was
afraid of trouble, because she had taken part herself, and cette dame, la
générale, was sure to come “right now, right now,” because they had sent
her a copy of the letter, and she would see at once that they really had the
letter and go to them, and that it was Lambert alone who had written to her,
and she knew nothing about Versilov; but Lambert had introduced himself
as a visitor from Moscow, from a certain Moscow lady, une dame de
Moscou (NB: Marya Ivanovna!).
“Ah, I’m sick! I’m sick!” Tatyana Pavlovna kept exclaiming.
“Sauvez-la, sauvez-la!”120 cried Alphonsinka.
Of course, there was something incongruous in this crazy news, even at
first glance, but there was no time to think it over, because essentially it was
all terribly plausible. It might still be supposed, and with great probability,
that Katerina Nikolaevna, having received Lambert’s invitation, would first
come to us, to Tatyana Pavlovna, to explain the matter; but, on the other
hand, that might well not happen, and she might go directly to them, and
then—she was lost! It was also hard to believe that she would just rush to
the unknown Lambert at the first summons; but again, it might happen for
whatever reason, for instance, seeing the copy and being convinced that
they indeed had her letter, and then—the same trouble! Above all, we didn’t
have a drop of time left, even in order to consider.
“And Versilov will do her in! If he’s stooped to Lambert, he’ll do her in!
It’s the double!” I cried.

“Ah, this ‘double’!” Tatyana Pavlovna wrung her hands. “Well, no help
for it,” she suddenly made up her mind, “take your hat and coat and off we
go. Take us straight to them, dearie. Ah, it’s so far! Marya, Marya, if
Katerina Nikolaevna comes, tell her that I’ll be back presently and that she
should sit and wait for me, and if she refuses to wait, lock the door and
force her to stay. Tell her I said so! A hundred roubles for you, Marya, if
you do me this service.”
We ran out to the stairs. No doubt it would have been impossible to think
up anything better, because in all events the main trouble was at Lambert’s
apartment, and if Katerina Nikolaevna indeed came to Tatyana Pavlovna
first, Marya could always keep her there. And yet, having already hailed a
cab, Tatyana Pavlovna suddenly changed her mind.
“You go with her!” she told me, leaving me with Alphonsinka,
“and die there if need be, understand? And I’ll follow you at once, but
I’ll swing by her place beforehand, on the chance that I’ll find her, because,
say what you will, but I find it suspicious!”
And she flew to Katerina Nikolaevna. Alphonsinka and I set off for
Lambert’s. I kept urging the cabbie on, and as we flew, I went on
questioning Alphonsinka, but Alphonsinka mostly got off with
exclamations, and finally with tears. But God kept and preserved us all,
when everything was hanging by a thread. Before we’d gone a quarter of
the way, I suddenly heard a shout behind me: someone called my name. I
turned to look—Trishatov was overtaking us in a cab.
“Where to?” he shouted in alarm. “And with her, with Alphonsinka!”
“Trishatov!” I cried to him. “What you said is true—bad trouble! I’m
going to that scoundrel Lambert! Let’s go together, there’ll be more of us!”
“Turn back, turn back right now!” shouted Trishatov. “Lambert’s
deceiving you, and so is Alphonsinka. The pockmarked one sent me.
They’re not at home; I’ve just met Versilov and Lambert; they were driving
to Tatyana Pavlovna’s . . . they’re there now . . .”

I stopped the cab and jumped over to Trishatov. To this day I don’t
understand how I could have decided so suddenly, but I suddenly believed
and suddenly decided. Alphonsinka screamed terribly, but we abandoned
her, and I don’t know whether she turned to follow us or went home, but
anyhow I never saw her again.
In the cab, Trishatov haphazardly and breathlessly told me that there was
some machination, that Lambert had come to an agreement with the
pockmarked one, but that the pockmarked one had betrayed him at the last
minute, and had just sent Trishatov to Tatyana Pavlovna to inform her that
she should not believe Lambert and Alphonsinka. Trishatov added that he
knew nothing more, because the pockmarked one hadn’t told him any more,
because he’d had no time, that he himself had hurried off somewhere, and
that it had all been done hastily. “I saw you driving,” Trishatov went on,
“and chased after you.” Of course, it was clear that this pockmarked one
also knew everything, because he had sent Trishatov straight to Tatyana
Pavlovna; but this was a new riddle.
But to avoid confusion, before describing the catastrophe, I’ll explain the
whole real truth and run ahead of myself for the last time.

IV
HAVING STOLEN THE letter then, Lambert at once joined with Versilov.
Of how Versilov could have coupled himself with Lambert, I will not speak
now; that’s for later; above all, it was the “double” here! But having
coupled himself with Versilov, Lambert was faced with luring Katerina
Nikolaevna as cleverly as possible. Versilov told him outright that she
wouldn’t come. But Lambert, ever since I had met him in the street that
evening two days before and, to show off, had told him I would return the
letter to her in Tatyana Pavlovna’s apartment and in Tatyana Pavlovna’s
presence—Lambert from that moment on had set up some sort of espionage
on Tatyana Pavlovna’s apartment—namely, he had bribed Marya. He had
given Marya twenty roubles, and then, a day later, when the theft of the
document had been accomplished, he had visited Marya for a second time

and come to a radical agreement with her, promising her two hundred
roubles for her services.
That was why, when she heard earlier that Katerina Nikolaevna would be
at Tatyana Pavlovna’s at half-past eleven and that I would be there as well,
Marya immediately rushed out of the house and went galloping in a cab to
Lambert with the news. This was precisely what she was to inform Lambert
of—it was in this that her service consisted. Just at that moment, Versilov,
too, was at Lambert’s. In one second Versilov came up with this infernal
combination. They say that madmen can be terribly clever at certain
moments.
The combination consisted in luring the two of us, Tatyana and me, out
of the apartment, at all costs, for at least a quarter of an hour, but before
Katerina Nikolaevna’s arrival. Then—to wait outside, and as soon as
Tatyana Pavlovna and I left, to run into the apartment, which Marya would
open for them, and wait for Katerina Nikolaevna. Meanwhile, Alphonsinka
was to do her best to keep us wherever she liked and however she liked.
Katerina Nikolaevna was to arrive, as she had promised, at half-past eleven,
meaning at least twice sooner than we could return. (Needless to say,
Katerina Nikolaevna had not received any invitation from Lambert, and
Alphonsinka had told a pack of lies, and it was this trick that Versilov had
thought up in all its details, while Alphonsinka had only played the role of
the frightened traitress.) Of course, there was a risk, but their reasoning was
correct: “If it works—good; if not—nothing’s lost, because the document is
still in our hands.” But it did work, and it couldn’t help working, because
we couldn’t help running after Alphonsinka, if only on the supposition,
“And what if it’s all true!” Again I repeat, there was no time to consider.

V
TRISHATOV AND I CAME running into the kitchen and found Marya in a
fright. She had been struck because, as she let Lambert and Versilov in, she
suddenly somehow noticed a revolver in Lambert’s hand. Though she had
taken the money, the revolver had not entered into her calculations. She was
bewildered and, as soon as she saw me, rushed to me:

“Mme. Akhmakov has come, and they’ve got a pistol!”
“Trishatov, wait here in the kitchen,” I ordered, “and the moment I shout,
come running as fast as you can to help me.”
Marya opened the door to the little corridor for me, and I slipped into
Tatyana Pavlovna’s bedroom—that same tiny room in which there was only
space enough for Tatyana Pavlovna’s bed and in which I had once
eavesdropped inadvertently. I sat on the bed and at once found myself an
opening in the portière.
But there was already noise and loud talk in the room. I’ll note that
Katerina Nikolaevna had entered the apartment exactly one minute after
them. I had already heard noise and talk from the kitchen; it was Lambert
shouting. She was sitting on the sofa, and he was standing in front of her
and shouting like a fool. Now I know why he so stupidly lost his wits: he
was in a hurry and was afraid they would be caught; later I’ll explain
precisely whom he was afraid of. The letter was in his hand. But Versilov
was not in the room. I prepared myself to rush in at the first sign of danger.
I give only the meaning of what was said, maybe there’s much that I don’t
remember correctly, but I was too agitated then to memorize it with final
precision.
“This letter is worth thirty thousand roubles, and you’re surprised! It’s
worth a hundred thousand, and I’m asking only thirty!” Lambert said loudly
and in awful excitement.
Katerina Nikolaevna, though obviously frightened, looked at him with a
sort of scornful surprise.
“I see some trap has been set here, and I don’t understand anything,” she
said, “but if you really have that letter . . .”
“Here it is, you can see for yourself! Isn’t this it? A promissory note for
thirty thousand and not a kopeck less!” Lambert interrupted her.
“I have no money.”

“Write a promissory note—here’s some paper. Then go and get the
money, and I’ll wait, but a week—no longer. You bring the money, I’ll give
you back the promissory note, and then I’ll give you the letter.”
“You speak to me in such a strange tone. You’re mistaken. If I go and
complain, this document will be taken from you today.”
“To whom? Ha, ha, ha! And the scandal? And if we show the letter to the
prince? Taken from me how? I don’t keep documents in my apartment. I’ll
show it to the prince through a third person. Don’t be stubborn, lady, say
thank you that I’m not asking much, somebody else would ask for certain
favors besides . . . you know what kind . . . something no pretty woman
refuses in embarrassing circumstances, that’s what kind . . . Heh, heh, heh!
Vous êtes belle, vous! ”121
Katerina Nikolaevna impetuously got up from her place, blushed all over,
and—spat in his face. Then she quickly made for the door. It was here that
the fool Lambert snatched out the revolver. He had blindly believed, like a
limited fool, in the effect of the document, that is—above all—he hadn’t
perceived whom he was dealing with, precisely because, as I’ve already
said, he considered that everyone had the same mean feelings as himself.
From the very first word, he had irritated her with his rudeness, whereas she
might not have declined to enter into a monetary deal.
“Don’t move!” he yelled, enraged at being spat upon, seizing her by the
shoulder and showing her the revolver—naturally just to frighten her. She
cried out and sank onto the sofa. I rushed into the room; but at the same
moment, Versilov, too, came running into the room from the door to the
corridor. (He had been standing there and waiting.) Before I could blink an
eye, he snatched the revolver from Lambert and hit him on the head with it
as hard as he could. Lambert staggered and fell senseless; blood gushed
from his head onto the carpet.
She, on seeing Versilov, suddenly turned as white as a sheet; for a few
moments she looked at him fixedly, in inexpressible horror, and suddenly
fell into a swoon. He rushed to her. All this seems to flash before me now. I

remember with what fear I then saw his red, almost purple, face and
bloodshot eyes. I think that, though he noticed me in the room, it was as if
he didn’t recognize me. He picked her up, unconscious, lifted her with
incredible strength, like a feather in his arms, and began carrying her
senselessly around the room like a child. The room was tiny, but he
wandered from corner to corner, obviously not knowing why he was doing
it. In one single moment he had lost his reason. He kept looking at her face.
I ran after him and was mainly afraid of the revolver, which he had simply
forgotten in his right hand and was holding right next to her head. But he
pushed me away, first with his elbow, then with his foot. I wanted to call out
to Trishatov, but was afraid to vex the madman. In the end, I suddenly
opened the portière and started begging him to put her down on the bed. He
went and put her down, stood over her himself, looked intently into her face
for about a minute, and suddenly bent down and kissed her twice on her
pale lips. Oh, I understood, finally, that this was a man who was totally
beside himself. Suddenly he went to swing the revolver at her, but, as if
realizing, turned the revolver around and aimed it at her face. I instantly
seized his arm with all my might and shouted to Trishatov. I remember we
both struggled with him, but he managed to free his arm and shoot at
himself. He had wanted to shoot her and then himself. But when we didn’t
let him have her, he pressed the revolver straight to his heart, but I managed
to push his hand up and the bullet struck him in the shoulder. At that
moment, Tatyana Pavlovna burst in with a shout; but he was already lying
senseless on the carpet beside Lambert.

Chapter Thirteen
Conclusion
I
THAT SCENE IS now almost six months in the past, and much has flowed
by since then, much is quite changed, and for me a new life has long begun
. . . But I will set the reader free as well.
For me, at least, the first question, both then and long afterwards, was:
how could Versilov join with such a man as Lambert, and what aim did he
have in view then? I have gradually arrived at some sort of explanation: in
my opinion, Versilov, in those moments, that is, in all that last day and the
day before, could not have had any firm aim, and I don’t think he even
reasoned at all here, but was under the influence of some whirlwind of
feelings. However, I do not admit of any genuine madness, the less so as he
is not mad at all now. But I do unquestionably admit of the “double.” What
essentially is a double? A double, at least according to a certain medical
book by a certain expert, which I later read purposely, a double is none
other than the first step in a serious mental derangement, which may lead to
a rather bad end. And Versilov himself, in the scene at mama’s, had
explained to us the “doubling” of his feelings and will with awful sincerity.
But again I repeat: that scene at mama’s, that split icon, though it
undoubtedly occurred under the influence of a real double, still has always
seemed to me in part a sort of malicious allegory, a sort of hatred, as it
were, for the expectations of these women, a sort of malice towards their
rights and their judgment, and so, half-and-half with his double, he smashed
the icon! It meant, “Thus I’ll split your expectations as well!” In short, if
there was a double, there was also simply a whim . . . But all this is only my
guess; to decide for certain is difficult.

True, despite his adoration of Katerina Nikolaevna, there was always
rooted in him a most sincere and profound disbelief in her moral virtue. I
certainly think that he was just waiting behind the door then for her
humiliation before Lambert. But did he want it, even if he was waiting?
Again I repeat: I firmly believe that he didn’t want anything then, and
wasn’t even reasoning. He simply wanted to be there, to jump out later, to
say something to her, and maybe—maybe to insult her, maybe also to kill
her . . . Anything might have happened then; only, as he was coming there
with Lambert, he had no idea what would happen. I’ll add that the revolver
belonged to Lambert, and he himself came unarmed. But seeing her proud
dignity, and, above all, unable to bear the scoundrel Lambert’s threatening
her, he jumped out—and then lost his reason. Did he want to shoot her at
that moment? In my opinion, he didn’t know himself, but he certainly
would have shot her if we hadn’t pushed his hand away.
His wound turned out not to be fatal and it healed, but he spent a long
time in bed—at mama’s, of course. Now, as I write these lines, it is spring
outside, the middle of May, a lovely day, and our windows are open. Mama
is sitting beside him; he strokes her cheeks and hair and looks into her eyes
with tender feeling. Oh, this is only half of the former Versilov, he no longer
leaves mama’s side and never will again. He has even received “the gift of
tears,” as the unforgettable Makar Ivanovich put it in his story about the
merchant; however, it seems to me that Versilov will live a long time. With
us he’s now quite simplehearted and sincere, like a child, without losing,
however, either measure or restraint, or saying anything unnecessary. All
his intelligence and all his moral cast have remained with him, though all
that was ideal in him stands out still more strongly. I’ll say directly that I’ve
never loved him as I do now, and I’m sorry that I have neither time nor
space to say more about him. However, I will tell one recent anecdote (and
there are many): by Great Lent he had recovered, and during the sixth week
he announced that he would prepare for communion.45 He hadn’t done that
for some thirty years or more, I think. Mama was glad; they started cooking
lenten meals, though quite costly and refined. From the other room I heard
him on Monday and Tuesday hum to himself “Behold, the Bridegroom
cometh”46—and admire the melody and the poetry. Several times during
those two days he talked very beautifully about religion; but on Wednesday

the preparation suddenly ceased. Something had suddenly irritated him,
some “amusing contrast,” as he put it, laughing. Something had displeased
him in the appearance of the priest, in the surroundings; but he only came
back and said with a quiet smile, “My friends, I love God very much, but—
I’m incapable of these things.” The same day roast beef was served at
dinner. But I know that even now mama often sits down beside him and in a
quiet voice and with a quiet smile begins to talk to him sometimes about the
most abstract things: she has suddenly become somehow bold with him
now, but how it happened I don’t know. She sits by him and talks to him,
most often in a whisper. He listens with a smile, strokes her hair, kisses her
hands, and the most complete happiness shines in his face. Sometimes he
also has fits, almost hysterical ones. Then he takes her photograph, the one
he kissed that evening, looks at it with tears, kisses it, remembers, calls us
all to him, but he says little at such moments . . . He seems to have forgotten
Katerina Nikolaevna completely, and has never once mentioned her name.
Of his marriage with mama, nothing has been said yet either. We wanted to
take him abroad for the summer, but Tatyana Pavlovna insisted that we not
take him, and he didn’t want it himself. They’ll spend the summer in a
country house somewhere in a village in the Petersburg region. Incidentally,
we’re all meanwhile living at Tatyana Pavlovna’s expense. I’ll add one
thing: I’m awfully sorry that in the course of these notes I have frequently
allowed myself to refer to this person disrespectfully and haughtily. But as I
wrote, I imagined myself exactly as I was at each of the moments I was
describing. On finishing my notes and writing the last line, I suddenly felt
that I had re-educated myself precisely through the process of recalling and
writing down. I disavow much that I’ve written, especially the tone of
certain phrases and pages, but I won’t cross out or correct a single word.
I said that he has never uttered a single word about Katerina Nikolaevna;
but I even think maybe he has been cured completely. Only Tatyana
Pavlovna and I talk occasionally about Katerina Nikolaevna, and even that
in secret. Katerina Nikolaevna is now abroad; I saw her before her
departure and visited her several times. I’ve already received two letters
from her from abroad, and have answered them. But of the content of our
letters and of what we discussed as we said good-bye before her departure, I
will not speak; that is another story, a quite new story, and even maybe all

still in the future. Even with Tatyana Pavlovna there are certain things I
keep silent about. But enough. I’ll only add that Katerina Nikolaevna is not
married and is traveling with the Pelishchevs. Her father is dead, and she is
the wealthiest of widows. At the present moment she’s in Paris. Her break
with Bjoring occurred quickly and as if of itself, that is, with the highest
degree of naturalness. However, I will tell about that.
On the morning of that terrible scene, the pockmarked one, to whom
Trishatov and his friend had gone over, managed to inform Bjoring of the
imminent evildoing. It happened in the following way: Lambert had after
all inclined him to take part with him and, getting hold of the document
then, had told him all the details and all the circumstances of the
undertaking, and, finally, the last moment of the plan as well, that is, when
Versilov thought up the combination of deceiving Tatyana Pavlovna. But at
the decisive moment, the pockmarked one preferred to betray Lambert,
being the most sensible of them all and foreseeing the possible criminality
in their projects. Above all, he considered Bjoring’s gratitude a much surer
thing than the fantastic plan of the inept but hot-tempered Lambert and a
Versilov nearly insane with passion. All this I learned later from Trishatov.
Incidentally, I do not know or understand Lambert’s relation with the
pockmarked one, and why Lambert couldn’t do without him. But much
more curious for me was the question of why Lambert needed Versilov,
when Lambert, who already had the document in his hands, could have
done perfectly well without his help. The answer is now clear to me: he
needed Versilov, first, because he knew the circumstances, but above all he
needed Versilov in case of an alarm or some sort of trouble, so that he could
shift all the responsibility onto him. And since Versilov wanted no money,
Lambert considered his help even far from superfluous. But Bjoring didn’t
manage to get there in time. He arrived an hour after the shot, when Tatyana
Pavlovna’s apartment already had a totally different look. Namely, about
five minutes after Versilov fell bleeding to the carpet, Lambert, whom we
all thought had been killed, rose and stood up. He looked around in
surprise, suddenly figured things out, went to the kitchen without saying a
word, put his coat on there, and vanished forever. He left the “document ”
on the table. I’ve heard that he wasn’t even sick, but just slightly unwell for
a while; the blow with the revolver had stunned him and drawn blood,

without causing any greater harm. Meanwhile, Trishatov had already run
for a doctor; but before the doctor arrived, Versilov came to, and before that
Tatyana Pavlovna, having brought Katerina Nikolaevna to her senses, had
managed to take her home. Thus, when Bjoring came running in on us, he
found in Tatyana Pavlovna’s apartment only me, the doctor, the sick
Versilov, and mama, who, though still sick, had come to him beside herself,
brought by the same Trishatov. Bjoring stared in bewilderment, and, as soon
as he learned that Katerina Nikolaevna had already left, went to her at once,
without saying a word to us.
He was put out; he saw clearly that scandal and publicity were now
almost inevitable. No big scandal occurred, however, only rumors came of
it. They didn’t manage to conceal the shot—that’s true—but the whole main
story, in its main essence, went almost unknown. The investigation
determined only that a certain V., a man in love, a family man at that and
nearly fifty years old, beside himself with passion and while explaining his
passion to a person worthy of the highest respect, but who by no means
shared his feelings, had shot himself in a fit of madness. Nothing more
came to the surface, and in this form the news, as dark rumors, penetrated
the newspapers, without proper names, only with initials. At least I know
that Lambert, for instance, wasn’t bothered at all. Nevertheless, Bjoring,
who knew the truth, was frightened. Just then, as if by design, he suddenly
managed to learn that a meeting, tête-à-tête, of Katerina Nikolaevna and
Versilov, who was in love with her, had taken place two days before the
catastrophe. This made him explode, and he rather imprudently allowed
himself to observe to Katerina Nikolaevna that, after that, he was no longer
surprised that such fantastic stories could happen to her. Katerina
Nikolaevna rejected him at once, without wrath, but also without hesitation.
Her whole preconceived opinion about some sort of reasonableness in
marrying this man vanished like smoke. Maybe she had already figured him
out long before, or maybe, after the shock she had received, some of her
views and feelings had suddenly changed. But here again I will keep silent.
I will only add that Lambert vanished to Moscow, and I’ve heard that he got
caught at something there. As for Trishatov, I lost sight of him long ago,
almost from that same time, despite my efforts to find his trail even now. He
vanished after the death of his friend, le grand dadais, who shot himself.

II
I’VE MENTIONED THE death of old Prince Nikolai Ivanovich. This
kindly, sympathetic old man died soon after the event, though, anyhow, a
whole month later—died at night, in bed, of a nervous stroke. After that
same day he spent in my apartment, I never saw him again. It was told of
him that during that month he had supposedly become incomparably more
reasonable, even more stern, was no longer frightened, did not weep, and in
all that time never once uttered a single word about Anna Andreevna. All
his love turned to his daughter. Once, a week before his death, Katerina
Nikolaevna suggested inviting me for diversion, but he even frowned. I
communicate this fact without any explanations. His estate turned out to be
in order and, besides that, there turned out to be quite a considerable capital.
Up to a third of this capital had, according to the old man’s will, to be
divided up among his countless goddaughters; but what everyone found
extremely strange was that in this will there was no mention at all of Anna
Andreevna: her name was omitted. But, nevertheless, I know this as a most
trustworthy fact: just a few days before his death, the old man, having
summoned his daughter and his friends, Pelishchev and Prince V——sky,
told Katerina Nikolaevna, in the likely chance of his imminent demise, to
be sure to allot sixty thousand roubles of this capital to Anna Andreevna.
He expressed his will precisely, clearly, and briefly, not allowing himself a
single exclamation or clarification. After his death, and when matters had
become clear, Katerina Nikolaevna informed Anna Andreevna, through her
attorney, that she could receive the sixty thousand whenever she liked; but
Anna Andreevna, drily and without unnecessary words, declined the offer:
she refused to receive the money, despite all assurances that such was
indeed the prince’s will. The money is still lying there waiting for her, and
Katerina Nikolaevna still hopes she will change her mind; but that won’t
happen, and I know it for certain, because I’m now one of Anna
Andreevna’s closest acquaintances and friends. Her refusal caused some
stir, and there was talk about it. Her aunt, Mme. Fanariotov, first vexed by
her scandal with the old prince, suddenly changed her opinion and, after the
refusal of the money, solemnly declared her respect. On the other hand, her
brother quarreled with her definitively because of it. But, though I often
visit Anna Andreevna, I can’t say that we get into great intimacies. We

don’t mention the old times at all; she receives me very willingly, but
speaks to me somehow abstractly. Incidentally, she firmly declared to me
that she will certainly go to a convent; that was not long ago; but I don’t
believe her and consider it just bitter words.
But bitter, truly bitter, are the words I’m now faced with saying in
particular about my sister Liza. Here is real unhappiness, and what are all
my failures beside her bitter fate! It began with Prince Sergei Petrovich not
recovering and dying in the hospital without waiting for the trial. He passed
away before Prince Nikolai Ivanovich. Liza was left alone with her future
child. She didn’t weep and, by the look of it, was even calm; she became
meek, humble; but all the former ardor of her heart was as if buried at once
somewhere in her. She humbly helped mama, took care of the sick Andrei
Petrovich, but she became terribly taciturn, did not even look at anyone or
anything, as if it was all the same to her, as if she was just passing by. When
Versilov got better, she began to sleep a lot. I brought her books, but she
didn’t want to read them; she began to get awfully thin. I somehow didn’t
dare to start comforting her, though I often came precisely with that
intention; but in her presence I somehow had difficulty approaching her,
and I couldn’t come up with the right words to begin speaking about it. So it
went on until one awful occasion: she fell down our stairs, not all the way,
only three steps, but she had a miscarriage, and her illness lasted almost all
winter. Now she has gotten up from bed, but her health has suffered a longlasting blow. She is silent and pensive with us as before, but she has begun
to talk a little with mama. All these last days there has been a bright, high
spring sun, and I kept remembering that sunny morning last autumn when
she and I walked down the street, both rejoicing and hoping and loving each
other. Alas, what happened after that? I don’t complain, for me a new life
has begun, but her? Her future is a riddle, and now I can’t even look at her
without pain.
Some three weeks ago, however, I managed to get her interested in news
about Vasin. He was finally released and set completely free. This sensible
man gave, they say, the most precise explanations and the most interesting
information, which fully vindicated him in the opinion of the people on
whom his fate depended. And his notorious manuscript turned out to be

nothing more than a translation from the French—material, so to speak, that
he had gathered solely for himself, intending afterwards to compose from it
a useful article for a magazine. He has now gone to ———province, but his
stepfather, Stebelkov, still goes on sitting in prison on his case, which, I’ve
heard, keeps growing and gets more and more complicated as time goes on.
Liza listened to the news about Vasin with a strange smile and even
observed that something like that was bound to happen to him. But she was
obviously pleased by the fact that the late Prince Sergei Petrovich’s
interference had done Vasin no harm. I have nothing to tell here about
Dergachev and the others.
I have finished. Maybe some readers would like to know what became of
my “idea” and what this new life is that is beginning for me now and that
I’ve announced so mysteriously. But this new life, this new path that has
opened before me, is precisely my “idea,” the same as before, but under a
totally different guise, so that it’s no longer recognizable. But it can’t be
included in my “Notes” now, because it’s something quite different. The old
life has totally passed, and the new has barely begun. But I will nevertheless
add something necessary: Tatyana Pavlovna, my intimate and beloved
friend, pesters me almost every day with exhortations that I enter the
university without fail and as soon as possible. “Later, when you’ve
finished your studies, you can think up other things, but now go and
complete your studies.” I confess, I’m pondering her suggestion, but I have
no idea what I’ll decide. Among other things, my objection to her has been
that I don’t even have the right to study now, because I should work to
support mama and Liza; but she offers her money for that and assures me
that there’s enough for my whole time at the university. I decided, finally, to
ask the advice of a certain person. Having looked around me, I chose this
person carefully and critically. It was Nikolai Semyonovich, my former
tutor in Moscow, Marya Ivanovna’s husband. Not that I needed anyone’s
advice so much, but I simply and irrepressibly wanted to hear the opinion of
this total outsider, even something of a cold egoist, but unquestionably an
intelligent man. I sent him my whole manuscript, asking him to keep it a
secret, because I had not yet shown it to anyone and especially not to
Tatyana Pavlovna. The manuscript came back to me two weeks later with a
rather long letter. I’ll make only a few excerpts from this letter, finding in

them a sort of general view and something explanatory, as it were. Here are
these excerpts.

III
“. . . AND NEVER, my unforgettable Arkady Makarovich, could you
have employed your leisure time more usefully than now, having written
these ‘Notes’ of yours! You’ve given yourself, so to speak, a conscious
account of your first stormy and perilous steps on your career in life. I
firmly believe that by this account you could indeed ‘re-educate yourself ’
in many ways, as you put it yourself. Naturally, I will not allow myself the
least thing in the way of critical observations per se; though every page
makes one ponder . . . for instance, the fact that you kept the ‘document’ so
long and so persistently is in the highest degree characteristic . . . But out of
hundreds of observations, that is the only one I will allow myself. I also
greatly appreciate that you decided to tell, and apparently to me alone, the
‘secret of your idea,’ according to your own expression. But your request
that I give my opinion of this idea per se, I must resolutely refuse: first,
there would not be room enough for it in a letter, and second, I am not ready
for an answer myself and still need to digest it. I will only observe that your
‘idea’ is distinguished by its originality, whereas the young men of the
current generation fall mainly upon ideas that have not been thought up but
given beforehand, and their supply is by no means great, and is often
dangerous. Your ‘idea,’ for instance, preserved you, at least for a while,
from the ideas of Messrs. Dergachev and Co., undoubtedly not so original
as yours. And, finally, I concur in the highest degree with the opinion of the
much-esteemed Tatyana Pavlovna, whom, though I know her personally, till
now I had never been able to appreciate in the measure that she deserves.
Her idea about your entering the university is in the highest degree
beneficial for you. Learning and life will, in three or four years,
undoubtedly open the horizon of your thoughts and aspirations still more
widely, and if, after the university, you propose to turn again to your ‘idea,’
nothing will hinder that.
“Now allow me on my own, and without your request, to lay out for you
candidly several thoughts and impressions that came to my mind and soul

as I was reading your so candid notes. Yes, I agree with Andrei Petrovich
that one might indeed have had fears for you and your solitary youth. And
there are not a few young men like you, and their abilities always threaten
to develop for the worse—either into a Molchalin-like obsequiousness47 or
into a secret desire for disorder. But this desire for disorder—and even most
often—comes, maybe, from a secret thirst for order and ‘seemliness’ (I am
using your word). Youth is pure if only because it is youth. Maybe in these
so early impulses of madness there lies precisely this desire for order and
this search for truth, and whose fault is it that some modern young men see
this truth and this order in such silly and ridiculous things that it is even
incomprehensible how they could believe in them! I will note, incidentally,
that before, in the quite recent past, only a generation ago, these interesting
young men were not to be so pitied, because in those days they almost
always ended by successfully joining our higher cultivated strata and
merging into one whole with them. And if, for instance, they were aware, at
the beginning of the road, of all their disorderliness and fortuitousness, of
all the lack of nobility, say, in their family surroundings, the lack of a
hereditary tradition and of beautiful, finished forms, it was even so much
the better, because later they themselves would consciously strive for these
things and learn to appreciate them. Nowadays it is somewhat different—
precisely because there is almost nothing to join.
“I will explain by a comparison or, so to speak, an assimilation. If I were
a Russian novelist and had talent, I would be sure to take my heroes from
the hereditary Russian nobility, because it is only in that type of cultivated
Russian people that there is possible at least the appearance of a beautiful
order and a beautiful impression, so necessary in a novel if it is to
graciously affect the reader. I am by no means joking when I say this,
though I myself am not a nobleman at all, which, however, you know
yourself. Pushkin already sketched out the subjects of his future novels in
his ‘Traditions of the Russian Family,’48 and, believe me, it indeed contains
all we have had of the beautiful so far. At least all we have had that has
been somewhat completed. I do not say this because I agree so
unconditionally with the correctness and truthfulness of this beauty; but
here, for instance, there were finished forms of honor and duty, which,

except among the nobility, are not only not finished anywhere in Russia, but
are not even begun. I speak as a peaceful man and seeking peace.
“Whether this honor is good and this duty right—is another question; but
for me it is more important that the forms precisely be finished and that
there be at least some sort of order that is not prescribed, but that we
ourselves have finally developed. God, the most important thing for us is
precisely at least some order of our own! In this has lain our hope and, so to
speak, our rest; finally at least something built, and not this eternal
smashing, not chips flying everywhere, not trash and rubbish, out of which
nothing has come in the last two hundred years.
“Do not accuse me of Slavophilism; I am saying it just so, from
misanthropy, because my heart feels heavy! Nowadays, in recent times,
something quite the opposite of what I have described above has been
happening among us. It is no longer rubbish that grows on to the higher
stratum of people, but, on the contrary, bits and pieces are torn with merry
haste from the beautiful type, and get stuck into one heap with the
disorderly and envious. And it is a far from isolated case that the fathers and
heads of former cultivated families themselves laugh at something that their
children may still want to believe in. What’s more, they enthusiastically do
not conceal from their children their greedy joy at the unexpected right to
dishonor, which a whole mass of them suddenly deduced from something. I
am not speaking about the true progressists, my dearest Arkady
Makarovich, but only about the riffraff, who have turned out to be
numberless, of whom it is said: ‘Grattez le russe et vous verrez le
tartare.’122 And, believe me, the true liberals, the true and magnanimous
friends of mankind, are by no means so many among us as it suddenly
seemed to us.
“But this is all philosophy; let us go back to the imaginary novelist. The
position of our novelist in such a case would be quite definite: he would be
unable to write in any other genre than the historical, for the beautiful type
no longer exists in our time, and if any remnants remain, in the nowdominant opinion, they have not kept their beauty. Oh, in the historical
genre it is still possible to portray a great many extremely pleasant and

delightful details! One can even carry the reader with one so far that he will
take the historical picture for something still possible in the present. Such a
work, given great talent, would belong not so much to Russian literature as
to Russian history. It would be an artistically finished picture of a Russian
mirage, which existed in reality until people realized that it was a mirage.
The grandson of the heroes portrayed in the picture portraying a Russian
family of the average upper-class cultivated circle over three generations
and in connection with Russian history—this descendant of his forebears
could not be portrayed as a contemporary type otherwise than in a
somewhat misanthropic, solitary, and undoubtedly sad guise. He should
even appear as a sort of eccentric, whom the reader could recognize at first
glance as someone who has quit the field, and be convinced that the field is
no longer his. A bit further, and even this misanthropic grandson will
vanish; new, as yet unknown persons will appear, and a new mirage; but
what kind of persons? If they are not beautiful, then the Russian novel will
no longer be possible. But, alas! is it only the novel that will turn out then to
be impossible?
“Rather than go far, I will resort to your own manuscript. Look, for
instance, at Mr. Versilov’s two families (this time allow me to be fully
candid). First of all, I will not expand on Andrei Petrovich himself; but,
anyhow, he still belongs among the ancestors. He is a nobleman of very
ancient lineage, and at the same time a Parisian communard.49 He is a true
poet and loves Russia, but on the other hand he totally denies her. He is
without any religion, but is almost ready to die for something indefinite,
which he cannot even name, but which he passionately believes in, after the
manner of a multitude of Russian-European civilizers of the Petersburg
period of Russian history. But enough of the man himself; here, however, is
his hereditary family. I will not even speak of his son, and he does not
deserve the honor. Those who have eyes know beforehand what such
rascals come to among us, and incidentally what they bring others to. But
his daughter Anna Andreevna—is she not a young lady of character? A
person on the scale of the mother superior Mitrofania50—not, of course, to
predict anything criminal, which would be unfair on my part. Tell me now,
Arkady Makarovich, that this family is an accidental phenomenon, and my
heart will rejoice. But, on the contrary, would it not be more correct to

conclude that a multitude of such unquestionably hereditary Russian
families are, with irresistible force, going over en masse into accidental
families and merging with them in general disorder and chaos? In your
manuscript you point in part to the type of this accidental family. Yes,
Arkady Makarovich, you are a member of an accidental family, as opposed
to our still-recent hereditary types, who had a childhood and youth so
different from yours.
“I confess, I would not wish to be a novelist whose hero comes from an
accidental family!
“Thankless work and lacking in beautiful forms. And these types in any
case are still a current matter, and therefore cannot be artistically finished.
Major mistakes are possible, exaggerations, oversights. In any case, one
would have to do too much guessing. What, though, is the writer to do who
has no wish to write only in the historical genre and is possessed by a
yearning for what is current? To guess . . . and be mistaken.
“But ‘Notes’ such as yours could, it seems to me, serve as material for a
future artistic work, for a future picture—of a disorderly but already bygone
epoch. Oh, when the evil of the day is past and the future comes, then the
future artist will find beautiful forms even for portraying the past disorder
and chaos. It is then that ‘Notes’ like yours will be needed and will provide
material—as long as they are sincere, even despite all that is chaotic and
accidental about them . . . They will preserve at least certain faithful
features by which to guess what might have been hidden in the soul of some
adolescent of that troubled time—a not-entirely-insignificant knowledge,
for the generations are made up of adolescents . . .”

